Title: Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.05602v1

Published Time: Fri, 05 Jun 2026 00:30:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# Fix the Mind, Not the Move: 

# Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

Ayano Hiranaka * 1 Ya-Chuan Hsu * 1 Stefanos Nikolaidis 1 Erdem Bıyık † 1 Daniel Seita † 1 

# Abstract 

AI assistants in human–AI collaboration often cor-rect suboptimal human actions through behavioral feedback (e.g., alerts or steering-wheel nudges in assistive driving). Such interventions can mit-igate immediate errors, but long-term improve-ment requires addressing the underlying miscon-ceptions that cause repeated mistakes. We in-troduce SENSEI, a framework that infers user misconceptions from interaction behavior and provides targeted, minimal yet sufficient sugges-tions to correct them. Our approach departs from action- or trajectory-level interventions by oper-ating over a structured knowledge representation to localize and correct the sources of erroneous behavior. Across three long-horizon tasks with diverse misconceptions and corresponding behav-iors, SENSEI demonstrates zero-shot composi-tional generalization, disentangling multiple over-lapping misconceptions despite training only on single-misconception cases. A user study fur-ther shows that our method identifies real human misconceptions and provides effective guidance that improves long-horizon task performance, suc-cessfully correcting 90% of student misconcep-tions. Code and project page are available at https://misoshiruseijin.github.io/SENSEI/. 

# 1. Introduction 

Research in the Learning Sciences emphasizes that ro-bust mastery requires more than correcting individual mis-takes; it requires correcting the underlying misconceptions that generate systematic errors (Brown & VanLehn, 1980; 

> ∗

Equal contribution †Equal advising 1Thomas Lord Depart-ment of Computer Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA. Correspondence to: Ayano Hiranaka <ahi-ranak@usc.edu >, Ya-Chuan Hsu <yachuanh@usc.edu >.

Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine Learning , Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026 by the author(s). 

Gusukuma et al., 2018a; Kennedy et al., 2020; Elmadani et al., 2012). We adopt the same principle to AI assistance for long-horizon decision-making tasks by updating the hu-man’s task knowledge so their future behavior matches an expert’s, including on new task instances. Symbolic and model-based work in human–robot collabo-ration and explainable planning provides an appealing sub-strate for such adoption, since task knowledge can be repre-sented explicitly and operationalized into behavior through planning (Chakraborti et al., 2017). However, much of prior literature is not posed as knowledge-aware assistance: it typically assumes a known human model (or a finite set of candidate models) and focuses on coordination or behav-ior explanation, rather than inferring misconceptions from observed behaviors and proposing minimal knowledge cor-rections (Carroll et al., 2019; Kedia et al., 2024; Losey & Sadigh, 2019; Liang et al., 2024; Chakraborti et al., 2017). On the other hand, several existing assistive AI systems observe human behavior traces and provide corrections by steering their actions (e.g., alerts, overrides, or guidance) without identifying the misconception underlying the fail-ure (Reddy et al., 2018; Bragg & Brunskill, 2019; Srivastava et al., 2022; Hong et al., 2023). While effective for immedi-ate correction, steering does not directly produce reusable diagnoses of what the human misunderstood, nor does it target interventions that minimize post-intervention errors on future actions in long-horizon settings. In short, prior work often fixes the move (via shared autonomy) or fixes the human’s understanding of the robot (via explanation), but does not fix the human’s mind regarding the task. In this paper, we frame AI-assistance for long-horizon decision-making as knowledge correction : aiming to pro-duce targeted guidance that updates a human’s internal task knowledge so their post-guidance behavior aligns with an expert in future tasks in a long-horizon setting. Consider a novice cook who attempts to make a boiled egg by placing a raw egg directly inside a microwave. A behavior-steering assistant might say: “Stop. Use a pot to boil the egg instead.” This avoids the immediate disaster, but the user may still retain the same flawed belief about what is safe to microwave. In contrast, knowledge correction 1 

> arXiv:2606.05602v1 [cs.AI] 4 Jun 2026 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization
> Figure 1. Conceptual overview. Given expert task knowledge, an expert trajectory, and a student trajectory, SENSEI infers the student’s underlying knowledge by (i) localizing which symbolic knowledge components are misaligned with the expert (e.g., misconception in item types) and (ii) predicting the student’s corresponding variant (e.g., swapping sugar and salt). It then produces a minimal, knowledge-aware assistance (shown in natural language) to correct the misconception and improve task behavior.

targets the misconception: “Microwaving a sealed, liquid-filled shell can cause pressure buildup and explosion.” This updated knowledge transfers: the novice cook now knows to vent sealed containers, pierce whole potatoes, and avoid similar hazards in new situations. We make the following contributions toward knowledge-aware assistance in long-horizon decision-making tasks: • Formulation of Knowledge-Aware Assistance. We formalize assistance as improving post-guidance per-formance on future tasks by aligning student knowl-edge to expert knowledge. By targeting understanding of state-independent knowledge rather than context-dependent actions, the formulation supports guidance that generalizes beyond the immediate episode. • Framework for Misconception Diagnosis via Struc-tured Corrections. We propose SENSEI, which iden-tifies task knowledge misconceptions from behavior traces and produces source-identified, interpretable cor-rections to the human’s symbolic knowledge model. This structured diagnose-then-edit design constrains the editor to minimal changes, reducing spurious up-dates and keeping corrections interpretable. • Empirical Validation & Real User Utility. We eval-uate SENSEI on three complex planning domains, demonstrating zero-shot compositional generalization, identifying multiple overlapping misconceptions de-spite training only on isolated errors. Finally, we con-duct a user study with 20 users demonstrating that SENSEI can diagnose and correct real human miscon-ceptions, supporting its practical utility. 

# 2. Related Works 

Overall, our work lies at the intersection of misconcep-tion diagnosis in intelligent tutoring, procedural/physical assistance, and knowledge-aware human–AI collaboration, combining behavioral evidence with minimal, interpretable task-knowledge updates. 

Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) and Misconception Diagnosis. Classic ITS tracks student mastery over prede-fined skills with methods such as BKT (Corbett & Anderson, 1994), PFA (Pavlik Jr et al., 2009), and their deep learning variants (Piech et al., 2015). While well-suited for predict-ing future performance, they typically do not recover the specific concept the student is missing or misapplying. A complementary line of work targets misconceptions : Repair Theory models errors as systematic application of “buggy” procedures (Brown & VanLehn, 1980), and classroom sys-tems show that correcting misconceptions improves learn-ing (Gusukuma et al., 2018b; Kennedy et al., 2020). How-ever, these approaches often rely on large annotated student datasets (Elmadani et al., 2012) or instructor-authored bug libraries (Gusukuma et al., 2018a). Recent generative assistants reduce data requirements by proposing fixes to student artifacts (e.g., code/workflows) via learned edit models (Heickal & Lan, 2025) or foundation-model reasoning (Yan et al., 2025; Phung et al., 2026), but the underlying misconception often remains implicit, lim-iting transfer beyond the immediate artifact. In contrast, SENSEI targets long-horizon decision-making tasks and explicitly infers a structured, reusable misconception cor-rection. 

Assistance in Procedural and Physical Domains. AI assis-tance in task-oriented domains often prioritizes immediate performance through action- or trajectory-level interven-tions. In continuous control (e.g., teleoperation or driving), this typically takes the form of shared autonomy or real-time corrective feedback that steers user actions toward an expert policy (Reddy et al., 2018; Bragg & Brunskill, 2019; Gopinath et al., 2025; Hsu et al., 2026). Even when framed as teaching (e.g., motor skill instruction), these methods 2Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

commonly intervene at the level of execution and are eval-uated by improved control performance (Srivastava et al., 2022), rather than producing an explicit, reusable diagnosis of the student’s underlying misconception. In higher-level sequential decision-making, related work studies influence and coordination by nudging human part-ners to improve joint outcomes (Hong et al., 2023). Such systems can substantially improve task efficiency online, but their interventions are typically not designed to yield a structured diagnosis of which aspects of the task the hu-man misunderstood, limiting transfer beyond the current episode or context. In contrast, SENSEI targets knowledge alignment in procedural planning: it infers and corrects the faulty concepts underlying behavioral errors, produc-ing interpretable knowledge-level edits that complement action-level assistance in long-horizon tasks. 

Human Mental Models for AI Assistance. Knowledge-aware AI assistive frameworks explicitly model what a human knows or believes during joint activity, enabling task and communication actions that maintain common ground (Alami et al., 2006). Epistemic task planning and theory-of-mind approaches track per-agent belief states un-der partial observability and perspective-taking, and act to prevent or repair belief divergence (Favier et al., 2023; Shekhar et al., 2024). Related work also models percep-tual constraints and plans information-revealing actions on-line by trading off task progress with reducing the human’s knowledge gaps (Hsu et al., 2025). While effective for co-ordination, these methods primarily treat mismatch as state uncertainty and typically rely on a hand-specified human update model, rather than diagnosing which task concepts the human misunderstands. A complementary symbolic lens comes from Explainable AI Planning, which represents mental-model mismatch as dif-ferences between planning models. However, these frame-works (Chakraborti et al., 2017; Sreedharan et al., 2018; Chakraborti et al., 2019) are typically used to explain or optimize robot behavior given assumed model differences, and do not solve the inverse diagnostic problem of infer-ring a specific, unknown knowledge model from behavioral traces. In contrast, SENSEI targets the inverse setting by localizing faulty symbolic knowledge components and syn-thesizing minimal corrections that account for the observed deviations. 

# 3. Problem Setting: Behavior Alignment via Knowledge Alignment 

We study long-horizon decision-making tasks where an ex-pert reliably succeeds, but a human fails systematically due to missing or incorrect task knowledge. Our goal is behavior alignment: improving the human’s behavior on future task instances toward the expert’s, while producing interpretable diagnoses of what the human misunderstands (see Fig. 1 for the problem concept). 

Behavior Alignment. Let Tj ∼ T be a task instance. The expert has a knowledge representation KE inducing behav-ior τ E ∼ π(· | T j , K E ). The human acts under an unknown internal knowledge KS , yielding τ S ∼ π(· | T j , K S ). We adopt the standard assumption that an agent acts rationally with respect to their internal model K to complete the task. The assistive AI observes an interaction history h (i.e., Tj

and τ S ; optionally τ E ) and outputs a guidance u ∈ U (feed-back, explanation, patch, demonstration). The human up-dates via an unknown mechanism KS+ = Update( KS , u ),then acts again. The assistive objective is to choose a policy 

μ : h × KE 7 → u minimizing expected post-guidance regret over future tasks Tj :

min  

> μ

ET ′ 

> j∼T

Regret  π(· | T ′ 

> j

, K S+), π (· | T ′ 

> j

, K E ) ,

(1) where Regret can be instantiated as success gap, cost gap, or trajectory divergence. Directly optimizing this objective typically requires repeated interventions and long-term outcomes. We therefore ap-proximate the behavior alignment objective with a more structured knowledge alignment objective. 

Knowledge Components. To formalize knowledge align-ment, assume that knowledge factorizes into interpretable components K = {ϕ0, . . . , ϕ N }, where each component ϕi

captures an aspect of world dynamics that is relevant to the task Tj (e.g., available objects or the feasibility and potential outcomes of an action). For each component index i, an agent instantiates a variant vi ∈ V i, representing one possi-ble understanding of ϕi. For example, if ϕi encodes knowl-edge about washing dishes, one variant may be “I can clean the pan without damaging it,” while another variant may be “I know how to clean the pan, but don’t know some cleaners may cause damage.” A student knowledge model is the resulting configuration KS = {vSi }i=0: N , while the expert holds KE = {vEi }i=0: N . We define the Knowledge Gaps 

as the set of component–variant pairs where the student’s variant differs from the expert’s: G(KE , K S ) = {(ϕi, v Si ) |

vSi̸ = vEi }. A student is fully masterful if G(KE , K S ) = ∅.

Problem Objectives. The main objective of the prob-lem is to align the human’s behavior in future task in-stances to the expert’s behavior. First, given observations 

O = ( Tj , K E , τ S ) (and optionally τ E ), we first predict the student knowledge ˆKS = f (O) that maximizes the likelihood of the observed student behavior: 

max 

> ˆKS

P (τ S | ˆKS ) (2) 3Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization {vE 

> i

# }i=0:N {eE 

> i

# }i=0:N

# τE

# τS floĉ gi

# fedit Δei

# fdec {̂vS 

> i

# }i=0:N

# (zE, zS, Δz, eE 

> i

# , eG)

# zE

# zS

# KE eG

# fenĉ eS 

> i

# = ei +̂ gi ⋅ Δei                

> Knowledge Gap Localization Latent Knowledge Editing and Decoding 1
> Knowledge & Behavior Encoder Localization Network Knowledge Editor Network
> 2
> Student Knowledge Decoder
> Figure 2. SENSEI architecture. 1⃝Knowledge Gap Localization Module : inputs are embedded by a frozen CodeT5+ encoder ϵand the
> Localization Network floc predicts which knowledge components a student has gaps in. 2⃝Knowledge Edit Module : the Latent Knowledge Editor Network fedit applies latent edits to expert knowledge components to generate a student knowledge component prediction, which is then translated to raw text describing the student knowledge by the Student Knowledge Decoder .

Equivalently, this aims to identify the correct set of knowl-edge gaps G(KE , ˆKS ).Conditioned on the predicted knowledge gaps G(KE , ˆKS ),the final goal is to generate a guidance signal u (e.g., an ex-planation or instruction) to update the student’s knowledge. The objective is to select u such that the student’s knowledge gaps are eliminated in the subsequent task instance: 

min  

> u

|G (KE , Update ( ˆKS , u )) | (3) where Update ( ˆKS , u ) indicates the student knowledge after receiving guidance u. Optimizing Eq. (3) is not equivalent to optimizing Eq. (1) as knowledge components have non-uniform behavioral impact. However, if G(KE , K S ) = ∅,then Regret = 0 . Thus, knowledge alignment provides a structured proxy objective for behavior alignment. 

# 4. Method 

Our method, Structured Extraction and Neural Synthesis of Errors for Intervention ( SENSEI ), follows a two-stage inference pipeline (Fig. 2). Given (KE , τ E , τ S ), SENSEI outputs (i) a predicted gap index set ˆIS from the Knowledge Gap Localization Module , where the true gaps are IS =

{i ∈ { 0, . . . , N } | vSi̸ = vEi }, and (ii) for each i ∈ ˆIS , an interpretable knowledge block ˆvSi from the Knowledge Edit Module , describing the student’s variant for that component. 

Knowledge Representation. While our problem formu-lation allows flexibility in knowledge representation, we represent expert and student task knowledge (i.e., KE and 

KS ) using Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL), a standard human-readable language for defining planning problems (McDermott et al., 1998). Each PDDL comprises code blocks, such as action blocks that define the pre-conditions and effects of an agent’s interaction with the environment, and objects blocks that define the types of objects in the environment. We treat each PDDL code block as a variant vi of the knowledge component ϕi, capturing semantically meaningful information relevant to the task, enabling component-level localization and correction. To represent agent behaviors ( τ ), we utilize the symbolic plan solutions to the PDDL problem. 

4.1. Two-Stage Inference 

We encode expert knowledge components and behaviors with a pretrained, frozen CodeT5+ encoder fenc (Wang et al., 2023). For each expert component, we obtain a component embedding eEi = fenc (vEi ), where vEi ∈ KE . We also encode expert and student behaviors as zE = fenc (τ E ) and 

zS = fenc (τ S ), and compute their difference ∆z = zE −zS .Additionally, we encode the full expert knowledge KE with 

fenc (via concatenating its components), to obtain a global knowledge embedding eG.

Stage 1: Knowledge Gap Localization. The localization network floc predicts which components are inconsistent with the student’s behavior. Concretely, for each component 

i ∈ { 0, . . . , N }, floc produces a logit ℓi (and binary label 

ˆgi ∈ { 0, 1}) predicting whether i ∈ I S :

ℓi = floc (zE , z S , ∆z, e Ei , e G), ˆgi = 1[σ(ℓi) > 0.5] , (4) where σ(·) is the sigmoid function. Localizing at the component level keeps computation per component fixed. Regardless of the total number of knowl-edge components or domain size, each prediction only pro-cesses a single component embedding eEi together with trajectory summaries. Such a design decouples model com-plexity from knowledge complexity and scales to large do-mains without requiring larger networks. 

Stage 2: Latent Knowledge Editing and Decoding. Given the localization outputs, the latent editor fedit predicts an edit vector ∆ei for each component and forms a predicted student embedding by editing the corresponding expert em-bedding: 

ˆeSi = eEi +ˆ gi ·∆ei, ∆ei = fedit (zE , z S , ∆z, e Ei , e G). (5) Intuitively, ˆeSi represents the student’s variant vSi in latent space for that component. During training, we use a soft gate for smoother gradient flow by replacing the hard label 4Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

with σ(ℓi):

ˆeSi = eEi + σ(ℓi) · ∆ei. (6) To produce an interpretable correction, we decode the edited embedding back into a raw knowledge text block ˆvSi using a CodeT5+ decoder fdec finetuned to reconstruct text from knowledge embeddings. This design structurally separates localization from correction, constraining the editor to act only on predicted gaps. As a result, it reduces hallucinated edits to correct components of the student knowledge, keep-ing the correction minimal and interpretable. 

4.2. Training Objectives 

Training targets three outcomes aligned with our evaluation metrics: (i) accurate gap localization over components, (ii) accurate gap correction on true-gap components, and (iii) minimal/no edits on non-gap components. We train all trainable modules jointly, while ensuring each loss updates only its intended sub-network as described below. 

Localization Network ( floc ). We train floc to predict the gap indicator ˆgi with a primary Single-Misconception Local-ization Loss Lsingle and an auxiliary Mixup Generalization Loss Lmix :

Lloc = Lsingle + λmix Lmix . (7) Both terms use binary cross-entropy (BCE); Lsingle is com-puted from embeddings of single-misconception behav-iors, while Lmix regularizes floc to generalize to multi-misconception inputs, whose behavior embeddings exhibit a distribution shift due to interacting gap signals. To construct pseudo multi-misconception training examples, we synthesize behavior embeddings from two students A

and B with gap index sets IA and IB :

zmix = αz A + (1 − α)zB , α ∼ U [0 , 1] . (8) We supervise predictions from zmix with the union label 

Imix = IA ∪ I B , i.e., Lmix is a BCE loss using Imix as ground truth. Intuitively, this encourages floc to recover each component-specific gap signal even when the embedding is perturbed by other misconceptions, thereby simulating interference patterns in real multi-gap trajectories. 

Latent Knowledge Editor Network ( fedit ). To ensure fedit 

outputs meaningful representations, we train the module us-ing an Alignment Loss ( Lalign ) and a No-Edit Loss ( Lno-op ): 

Ledit = Lalign + λno-op Lno-op (9) where Lalign and Lno-op are defined as: 

Lalign = X

> i∈I S

MSE (ˆ eSi , e Si ), Lno-op = X

> i / ∈I S

L2(∆ ei) (10) The mean-squared error (MSE) loss Lalign enforces the pre-dicted student knowledge variant embedding ˆeSi to align with the ground truth student variant embedding eSi =

fenc (vSi ). The L2 loss Lno-op discourages the editor from modifying components that are not gaps ( gi = 0) .

Student Knowledge Decoder Model ( fdec ). We first project ˆeSi into a fixed set of memory tokens m(ˆ eSi ),which the decoder attends to when generating text. Let 

(wSi, 1, . . . , w Si,T i ) denote the tokenization of the ground-truth student knowledge. We then train the decoder with teacher forcing using the standard auto-regressive cross-entropy loss on the student’s ground-truth gap tokens: 

Ldec = − X

> t

log p(wi,t | wi,<t , m (ˆ ei)) . (11) See Appendix B for model architecture and training details. 

# 5. Experiments 

5.1. Dataset 

Our dataset contains tuples of (KE , K S , τ E , τ S ) and ground-truth faulty component labels IS . We sample stu-dent models with 1 to 3 misconceptions, generate plans with OPTIC (Benton et al., 2012), and augment the data with additional valid plan variants by reordering actions while preserving plan validity. Note that we train only on 1 mis-conception data, reserving 2- and 3- misconception data solely for evaluation. See Appendix A for details. Specifically, we simulate student models by perturbing the expert PDDL in three ways, chosen to induce qualitatively distinct plan signatures: • Type (item misuse): the agent miscategorizes objects and treats an object as the wrong class. Simulated by swapping type assignments in the objects block. • Hazard (risky behavior): the agent ignores negative side-effects, producing plans that look efficient but violate safety/capacity constraints. Simulated by re-moving negative predicates from action effects .• Skill (workarounds): the agent cannot execute a key capability, leading to detours that bypass the missing skill. Simulated by assigning a prohibitive cost to the corresponding action. The above categories are a starting point, rather than an exhaustive list, to model a full range of real-world human er-rors. However, SENSEI’s architecture is not bound by these categories. Since SENSEI decouples knowledge complexity from model complexity, it scales to complex real-world mis-conceptions by expanding the PDDL representations and collecting additional human data. 5Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

5.2. Domains 

We evaluate on three planning domains that admit diverse, solvable knowledge perturbations (details in Appendix A.1): • Breakfast : a household cooking domain (ingredients, tools, appliances) where plans involve multi-step prepa-ration and cleanup. • Overcooked : a single-agent variant of Overcooked-AI (Carroll et al., 2019) with navigation, ingredient processing, and dish assembly in a kitchen layout that constrains paths and reachability (e.g., locked doors force longer routes to stations). • Rover : a modified International Planning Competi-tion’s Rovers task (Long & Fox, 2003) where a rover acquires soil/rock samples and images and transmits results. We add a capacity/communication structure to produce diverse behaviors under misconceptions. 

5.3. Baselines 

To the best of our knowledge, SENSEI is the first frame-work to address the problem of interpretable knowledge diagnosis through explicit correction of structured symbolic knowledge representations. As no off-the-shelf methods ex-ist for this framework, we construct baselines representing different plausible approaches to our problem: 

Monolithic End-to-End Model. We train a single con-ditional decoder that generates the corrected PDDL block from embeddings of the expert knowledge components and behaviors, together with the student’s behavior. A frozen CodeT5+ encoder produces (zE , z S , ∆z, e Ei ), which are projected into a fixed set of memory tokens. A CodeT5+ de-coder then cross-attends to decode ˆvSi with teacher forcing. This baseline has no explicit gap localizer or editor; both whether and how to edit must be learned implicitly. For fairness, we initialize from the same pretrained decoder and projection checkpoints as our main method and fine-tune on component-level corrections. 

Off-the-Shelf LLMs. To investigate if specialized training is needed, we evaluate a general-purpose reasoning base-line using GPT-4o and GPT-5.2 (Achiam et al., 2023), and Llama-3.3-70B (Grattafiori et al., 2024). We prompt each model with expert knowledge and behavior, student behav-ior, and natural language instructions to identify gap com-ponents and propose corrections that reflect the student’s misconceptions. Conditions ˆeSi = eSi and ˆeSi = eEi were judged by prompting GPT-4o to evaluate the semantic equiv-alence of the student PDDL blocks generated by the LLM and true target blocks. Additional details are in Appendix E. 

Additional Localization Bounds. In addition to the above baselines, we evaluate localization bounds that isolate sources of misconceptions: (i) Random-Loc , which selects components uniformly at random at each trajectory step; (ii) Random-H-Loc , which samples uniformly from com-ponents that appeared as gaps in the training set; and (iii) 

Oracle-Loc , which returns the ground-truth gap indices. 

5.4. Evaluation Metrics 

We evaluate SENSEI at both the component level (gap lo-calization vs. edit module) and the system level (full frame-work). All metrics are computed over PDDL blocks. Let 

gi ∈ { 0, 1} indicate whether component i contains a ground-truth gap, and let ˆgi ∈ { 0, 1} be the predicted gap indicator to trigger a correction. If ˆgi=1 , the edit module outputs an edited student component ˆvSi . We compare ˆvSi to the true student component vSi if the localization is correct ( gi = 1 )or the expert component vEi if the localization is erroneous (gi = 0 ). We annotate each metric with ↑ (higher is better) or ↓ (lower is better). 

Localization (where to correct). Localization Recall 

(Loc rec ) measures how many true gaps are localized, while 

Localization Precision (Loc prec ) measures how often a lo-calized gap corresponds to a true gap: Loc rec (↑) = 

P 

> i

1[gi=1 ∧ ˆgi=1] 

P 

> i

1[gi=1] ,

Loc prec (↑) = 

P 

> i

1[gi=1 ∧ ˆgi=1] 

P 

> i

1[ˆ gi=1] .

Edit (correction quality given a trigger). Edit Accuracy on Correct Localizations (Edit acc ) measures how often we accurately correct a localized true gap, and No-Op Rate on Erroneous Localizations ( Edit no-op ) measures how often we avoid damaging a correct component under an incorrect localization: Edit acc (↑) = 

P 

> i

1[gi=1 ∧ ˆgi=1 ∧ ˆeSi =eSi ]

P 

> i

1[gi=1 ∧ ˆgi=1] ,

Edit no-op (↑) = 

P 

> i

1[gi=0 ∧ ˆgi=1 ∧ ˆeSi =eEi ]

P 

> i

1[gi=0 ∧ ˆgi=1] .

System (overall utility). System Recall (Sys rec ) measures what fraction of all true gaps are successfully corrected by the full pipeline, System Precision (Sys prec ) measures how often a correction is both necessary and successful, and System False Correction Rate ( Sys false ) measures how often the system incorrectly localizes and modifies a no-gap 6Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

component: Sys rec (↑) = 

P 

> i

1[gi=1 ∧ ˆgi=1 ∧ ˆeSi =eSi ]

P 

> i

1[gi=1] ,

Sys prec (↑) = 

P 

> i

1[gi=1 ∧ ˆgi=1 ∧ ˆeSi =eSi ]

P 

> i

1[ˆ gi=1] ,

Sys false (↓) = 

P 

> i

1[gi=0 ∧ ˆgi=1 ∧ ˆeSi̸ =eEi ]

P 

> i

1[gi=0] .

5.5. Experiment Results 

To evaluate performance, we report the F1 scores for local-ization and end-to-end correction ( Loc F1 and Sys F1 , high-lighted in blue in Table 1) as summary metrics capturing the precision–recall trade-off inherent to diagnosis. We also measure correction accuracy on localized true-gap compo-nents ( Edit acc ). For interpretability, we report Loc rec , Loc prec 

and Sys rec , Sys prec , along with Sys false to capture erroneous corrections to components with no true gaps. To isolate correction-synthesis behavior, we report the no-op rate on erroneously localized no-gap components (Edit no-op ). 

Overall Performance. In all domains, SENSEI achieves the best balance between correcting true gaps and avoiding erro-neous corrections: Breakfast ( Sys F1 = 0 .709 ), Overcooked (0.726 ), and Rover ( 0.561 ). In contrast, most learned base-lines either miss the majority of gaps (low Sys rec ) or produce overly broad diagnoses (low Sys prec ), resulting in low Sys F1 .

Localization is Non-Trivial. Random localization baselines achieve high system recall by identifying many components as gaps, but their low precision leads to poor Sys F1 (e.g., Random-Loc: 0.069 in Overcooked) and high erroneous edit rates ( Sys false = 0 .957 –1.0). SENSEI substantially im-proves localization quality, achieving consistently higher Loc F1 (Breakfast/Overcooked/Rover: 0.731 /0.726 /0.561 )than Random-H-Loc ( 0.369 /0.500 /0.299 ), indicating it se-lects a smaller, more relevant set of components for correc-tion without collapsing recall. 

End-to-End vs. Modular Correction. The End-to-End baseline significantly underperforms SENSEI in localizing the gap components (e.g., Overcooked Loc rec = 0 .042 ;Breakfast Loc rec = 0 .291 ). The correction synthesis is also unreliable as the editor tends to edit knowledge components regardless of necessity across all three domains, Edit no-op =0.0. This highlights the benefits of decoupling where to edit 

from how to edit , as SENSEI maintains strong localization capabilities while producing highly accurate corrections (Edit acc = 0 .97 –1.0), yielding consistently higher Sys F1 .

LLM Baselines. Direct LLM-based correction struggles with producing consistent PDDL corrections, reflected by high abstention/no-op rates (e.g., Edit no-op = 0 .539 –0.760 )and low localization recall, yielding low end-to-end per-formance (especially in Rover, where Sys F1 = 0 ). This gap motivates our structured editor, which achieves near-perfect correction accuracy once the appropriate component is localized (e.g., Edit acc ≥ 0.97 for SENSEI). 

5.6. Ablation Studies 

To validate our architectural design, we analyze the con-tribution of the mixup generalization loss and the expert reference. Results are presented in Table 2. 

Effect of Latent Mixup in Generalization. We train a vari-ant No-Mixup without the auxiliary mixup generalization loss ( λmix = 0 ). This variant suffers a catastrophic drop in system recall, particularly in the Breakfast domain (drop from 0.762 to 0.221 ). Without the synthetic mixed behav-iors, the localization network becomes extremely conserva-tive, validating Lmix as a significant contributor to SENSEI’s zero-shot compositional generalization capabilities. 

The Role of Expert Reference. Although No-Expert achieves a higher Sys F1 than SENSEI in Breakfast and Rover, the underlying metrics indicate a different precision-recall trade-off rather than a failure of expert anchoring. As shown in Table 2, No-Expert yields lower recall and higher precision than SENSEI. Replacing the expert anchor with a randomly sampled student during training exposes the model to behavioral differences between two subopti-mal, noisy agents. We hypothesize that this encourages a more conservative decision boundary: the model requires stronger behavioral evidence before declaring knowledge gaps. As a result, No-Expert produces fewer false positives and achieves higher precision, but misses more subtle gaps, reducing recall. Conversely, SENSEI (expert-anchored dur-ing training and inference) is highly sensitive to deviations from expert-aligned knowledge and yields higher recall across all three domains. This distinction also helps ex-plain the threshold-tuning results in Appendix C.1. When each method is optimized for Sys F1 , SENSEI achieves the highest average Sys F1 across the three tasks. Ultimately, No-Expert’s competitive performance is encouraging, demon-strating our framework’s potential for general agent-agent alignment where a definitive expert is unavailable. 

5.7. User Study Experimental Setup. We conducted a user study with 20 users in our modified Overcooked task (Fig. 3). Users were assigned to one of four groups. All groups shared the same goal, but we induced two misconceptions per group by withholding key instructions (e.g., how to open a locked door). Users first attempted the task with incomplete un-derstanding, then reattempted after receiving SENSEI’s tar-geted natural-language guidance. Additional information is provided in Appendix D. The study was approved by an Institutional Review Board. 7Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

Table 1. Simulation Experiment Results. Bold indicates the best values; blue highlights indicate the main metrics we use for evaluation; the “–” indicates that the metric is not applicable, since no erroneous localization on true gaps occurred. See Sec. 5.5 for more details. 

Loc rec (↑) Loc prec (↑) Loc F1 (↑) Edit acc (↑) Edit no-op (↑) Sys rec (↑) Sys prec (↑) Sys F1 (↑) Sys false (↓)

Breakfast Random-Loc 0.997 0.104 0.188 0.875 0.0 0.875 0.092 0.166 0.999 Random-H-Loc 0.998 0.226 0.369 0.876 0.0 0.876 0.199 0.324 0.400 End-to-End 0.424 0.514 0.465 0.947 0.0 0.401 0.487 0.440 0.043 GPT-4o 0.147 0.339 0.205 0.524 0.720 0.077 0.177 0.107 0.007 GPT-5.2 0.157 0.257 0.195 0.644 0.392 0.101 0.166 0.126 0.024 Llama-3.3-70B 0.118 0.203 0.149 0.059 0.040 0.007 0.013 0.009 0.037 

SENSEI (ours) 0.786 0.683 0.731 0.97 0.0 0.762 0.663 0.709 0.043 Oracle-Loc (Upper) 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.867 0.0 0.867 0.867 0.867 0.0 Overcooked Random-Loc 1.0 0.040 0.077 0.925 0.0 0.925 0.036 0.069 1.0 Random-H-Loc 1.0 0.333 0.500 0.925 0.0 0.925 0.308 0.462 0.082 End-to-End 0.042 0.027 0.033 0.853 0.0 0.036 0.023 0.028 0.061 GPT-4o 0.185 0.196 0.190 0.027 0.539 0.005 0.005 0.005 0.012 GPT-5.2 0.275 0.224 0.247 0.309 0.220 0.085 0.069 0.076 0.026 Llama-3.3-70B 0.335 0.179 0.233 0.104 0.300 0.035 0.019 0.025 0.038 

SENSEI (ours) 0.828 0.646 0.726 1.0 0.0 0.828 0.646 0.726 0.019 Oracle-Loc (Upper) 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.924 0.0 0.924 0.924 0.924 0.0 Rover Random-Loc 1.0 0.088 0.162 0.940 0.040 0.939 0.083 0.153 0.957 Random-H-Loc 1.0 0.176 0.299 0.940 0.090 0.942 0.166 0.282 0.410 End-to-End 0.291 0.424 0.176 1.0 0.0 0.291 0.424 0.176 0.038 GPT-4o 0.008 0.016 0.011 0.0 0.760 0.0 0.017 0.0 0.0 GPT-5.2 0.008 0.016 0.011 0.0 0.184 0.0 0.056 0.0 0.0 Llama-3.3-70B 0.012 0.021 0.015 0.0 0.072 0.0 0.071 0.0 0.0 

SENSEI (ours) 0.726 0.457 0.561 1.0 0.03 0.727 0.457 0.561 0.081 Oracle-Loc (Upper) 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.935 0.0 0.935 0.935 0.935 0.0 

Table 2. Ablation Experiment Results. Sys rec (↑) Sys prec (↑) Sys F1 (↑)

Breakfast No-Mixup 0.221 0.954 0.359 No-Expert-Traj 0.673 0.793 0.728 No-Expert 0.635 0.923 0.752 

SENSEI 0.762 0.663 0.709 Overcooked No-Mixup 0.690 0.707 0.698 No-Expert-Traj 0.774 0.670 0.718 No-Expert 0.747 0.672 0.708 

SENSEI 0.828 0.646 0.726 

Rover No-Mixup 0.457 0.743 0.566 No-Expert-Traj 0.673 0.365 0.473 No-Expert 0.680 0.512 0.584 

SENSEI 0.727 0.457 0.561 

Quantitative Results. Using the purposely withheld infor-mation as the ground truth knowledge gaps, we compute Sys rec and Sys prec . Additionally, we compute intersection over union (IoU) of plan steps to measure the alignment between the subject and expert behavior before and after guidance. Across 20 subjects, SENSEI corrected knowledge gaps with Sys rec = 0 .895 and Sys prec = 0 .555 , increasing IoU alignment scores from 0.736 to 0.844 (10.8% increase). 

Qualitative Results. Post-study surveys indicate that, per session, users received an average of 1.90 helpful tips (re-vealing new information) and 1.64 unhelpful tips (i.e., SEN-SEI falsely identified gaps and provided information they already knew). This ratio suggests that while successful diagnoses are highly valued, erroneous corrections remain Door 

> Player
> Onions Dishes
> Tomatoes
> Pot
> Serving Location

1

2   

> I don’t know how to open
> the door. I’ll take path .CLICK!
> 2
> Now I can open the door to
> take the shorter path !1
> Initial Try
> SENSEI Feedback
> Next Try
> SENSEI
> 1. TOMATO needs to be handled
> with care.
> 2. DOOR to the DISH opens by
> pressing ‘A’ by the door.

Figure 3. User Study Overview. Users completed a soup-cooking task in our modified Overcooked-AI environment by placing onions and tomatoes into the pot, cooking and plating the soup, and delivering it to the serving location. In the initial trial, we withheld key task information (e.g., how to open locked doors). SENSEI then identified the missing knowledge and outputted tar-geted guidance to a terminal. After reading the guidance, users completed the next trial, improving their play from the initial trial. 

a key source of friction. Nevertheless, users rated the sys-tem’s subjective helpfulness at 4.27 /5 (Likert), suggesting a positive reception: knowledge-aware guidance is valuable enough that users tolerate frequent unhelpful feedback. 

# 6. Discussion and Conclusion 

We presented SENSEI, a knowledge-correction framework for AI-assisted long-horizon decision-making. Given an expert reference and student behavior, SENSEI models the student as a planner with potentially flawed task knowl-8Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

edge, (i) localizes the symbolic knowledge components that explain observed deviations, and (ii) synthesizes minimal, interpretable corrections. Across three domains with diverse misconception types, SENSEI achieves strong end-to-end correction quality and exhibits zero-shot compositional gen-eralization to multi-misconception behaviors despite being trained only on single-misconception trajectories. A user study (20 users) further demonstrates SENSEI identifying human misconception-induced errors and improving post-guidance performance toward expert behavior. These results also surface important open challenges. Maxi-mizing coverage can increase erroneous corrections, moti-vating better interaction strategies that reduce unnecessary guidance without sacrificing recall. In addition, since SEN-SEI is grounded in an expert reference model, it inherits a normative notion of optimality defined by the expert. Apply-ing this approach to open-ended settings would require care to avoid penalizing valid alternative strategies. Future work includes extending beyond PDDL domains and develop-ing value-aware approaches for misconception localization. By weighting knowledge gaps based on their downstream behavioral impact rather than treating them uniformly, we aim to bridge the remaining gap between the knowledge alignment and behavior alignment objectives. Overall, SEN-SEI supports a shift from trajectory-level steering toward structured knowledge-model correction as a foundation for interpretable AI assistance in long-horizon tasks. 

# Impact Statement 

This work aims to advance the capabilities of AI assis-tance systems by enabling interpretable diagnosis of stu-dent knowledge misconceptions and providing assistance to resolve the misconceptions. By moving beyond opaque behavior steering toward transparent, logic-based diagnosis, our framework has the potential to democratize access to personalized, high-quality instruction in complex domains. However, we acknowledge the potential risks associated with automated misconception diagnosis. First, our reliance on expert reference trajectories and pre-defined PDDL do-mains implies a normative definition of “optimality.” In open-ended real-world scenarios, this rigid adherence to a specific expert’s logic could inadvertently penalize cre-ative or alternative problem-solving strategies that deviate from the reference but remain valid. Second, as observed in our user study, diagnostic systems are prone to erroneous corrections (hallucinating misconceptions where none ex-ist). In real-world settings, “hallucinating” errors can lead to student frustration, confusion, or decreased self-efficacy. Therefore, we emphasize that such systems should be de-ployed as supportive tools rather than autonomous evalua-tors, particularly in high-stakes environments where diag-nostic accuracy and precision are critical. 

# Acknowledgements 

This research was supported in part by research gifts from OpenAI. 

# References 

Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I., Aleman, F. L., Almeida, D., Altenschmidt, J., Altman, S., Anadkat, S., et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023. Alami, R., Clodic, A., Montreuil, V., Sisbot, E. A., and Chatila, R. Toward human-aware robot task planning. In AAAI Spring Symposium: To Boldly Go Where No Human-Robot Team Has Gone Before , 2006. Ba, J. L., Kiros, J. R., and Hinton, G. E. Layer normalization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450 , 2016. Benton, J., Coles, A., and Coles, A. Temporal planning with preferences and time-dependent continuous costs. In International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS) , 2012. Bragg, J. and Brunskill, E. Fake it till you make it: Learning-compatible performance support. In Uncertainty in Artifi-cial Intelligence Conference (UAI) , 2019. Brown, J. S. and VanLehn, K. Repair theory: A generative theory of bugs in procedural skills. Cognitive Science , 4 (4):379–426, 1980. Carroll, M., Shah, R., Ho, M. K., Griffiths, T., Seshia, S., Abbeel, P., and Dragan, A. On the utility of learning about humans for human-ai coordination. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2019. Chakraborti, T., Sreedharan, S., Zhang, Y., and Kambham-pati, S. Plan explanations as model reconciliation: Mov-ing beyond explanation as soliloquy. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) , 2017. Chakraborti, T., Kulkarni, A., Sreedharan, S., Smith, D. E., and Kambhampati, S. Explicability? legibility? pre-dictability? transparency? privacy? security? the emerg-ing landscape of interpretable agent behavior. In Interna-tional Conference on Automated Planning and Schedul-ing (ICAPS) , 2019. Corbett, A. T. and Anderson, J. R. Knowledge tracing: Modeling the acquisition of procedural knowledge. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction , 4(4):253–278, 1994. Elmadani, M., Mathews, M., and Mitrovic, A. Data-driven misconception discovery in constraint-based intelligent tutoring systems. In International Conference on Com-puters in Education (ICCE) , 2012. 9Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

Favier, A., Shekhar, S., and Alami, R. Models and algo-rithms for human-aware task planning with integrated theory of mind. In IEEE International Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN) , 2023. Gopinath, D., Cui, X., DeCastro, J., Sumner, E., Costa, J., Yasuda, H., Morgan, A., Dees, L., Chau, S., Leonard, J., Chen, T., Rosman, G., and Balachandran, A. Com-putational teaching for driving via multi-task imitation learning. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2025. Grattafiori, A., Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., Pandey, A., Kadian, A., Al-Dahle, A., Letman, A., Mathur, A., Schelten, A., Vaughan, A., et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 , 2024. Gusukuma, L., Bart, A. C., Kafura, D., and Ernst, J. Misconception-driven feedback: Results from an experi-mental study. In ACM Conference on International Com-puting Education Research (ICER) , 2018a. Gusukuma, L., Bart, A. C., Kafura, D., Ernst, J., and Cen-namo, K. Instructional design + knowledge components: A systematic method for refining instruction. In ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education (SIGCSE) , 2018b. Heickal, H. and Lan, A. Learning code-edit embeddings to model student debugging behavior. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED) ,2025. Hendrycks, D. and Gimpel, K. Gaussian error linear units (gelus). arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.08415 , 2016. Hong, J., Levine, S., and Dragan, A. Learning to influence human behavior with offline reinforcement learning. In 

Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. Hsu, Y.-C., Defranco, M., Patel, R., and Nikolaidis, S. Inte-grating field of view in human-aware collaborative plan-ning. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2025. Hsu, Y.-C., DeCastro, J., Silva, A., and Rosman, G. Tim-ing the message: Language-based notifications for time-critical assistive settings. In International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS) ,2026. Kedia, K., Bhardwaj, A., Dan, P., and Choudhury, S. In-teract: Transformer models for human intent prediction conditioned on robot actions. In IEEE International Con-ference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2024. Kennedy, C., Lawson, A., Feaster, Y., and Kraemer, E. Misconception-based peer feedback: A pedagogical tech-nique for reducing misconceptions. In ACM Conference on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Edu-cation (ITiCSE) , 2020. Liang, Y., Chen, D., Gupta, A., Du, S. S., and Jaques, N. Learning to cooperate with humans using genera-tive agents. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. Long, D. and Fox, M. The 3rd international planning com-petition: Results and analysis. In Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 2003. Losey, D. P. and Sadigh, D. Robots that take advantage of human trust. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2019. McDermott, D., Ghallab, M., Howe, A., Knoblock, C., Ram, A., Veloso, M., Weld, D., and Wilkins, D. PDDL—the planning domain definition language. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence Planning Systems (AIPS) , 1998. Pavlik Jr, P. I., Cen, H., and Koedinger, K. R. Performance factors analysis–a new alternative to knowledge tracing. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED) , 2009. Phung, T., Choi, H., Wu, M., Brooks, C., Gulwani, S., and Singla, A. Closing the loop: An instructor-in-the-loop ai assistance system for supporting student help-seeking in programming education. In ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education (SIGCSE) , 2026. Piech, C., Bassen, J., Huang, J., Ganguli, S., Sahami, M., Guibas, L. J., and Sohl-Dickstein, J. Deep knowledge trac-ing. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) ,2015. Reddy, S., Dragan, A. D., and Levine, S. Shared autonomy via deep reinforcement learning. In Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2018. Shekhar, S., Favier, A., and Alami, R. Human-aware epis-temic task planning for human-robot collaboration. In 

The HAXP: Human-Aware and Explainable Planning Workshop at ICAPS , 2024. Sreedharan, S., Srivastava, S., and Kambhampati, S. Hier-archical expertise-level modeling for user specific robot-behavior explanations. Explainable Planning (XAIP) Workshop at ICAPS , 2018. Srivastava, M., Biyik, E., Mirchandani, S., Goodman, N., and Sadigh, D. Assistive teaching of motor control tasks to humans. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. 10 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

Wang, Y., Le, H., Gotmare, A., Bui, N., Li, J., and Hoi, S. Codet5+: Open code large language models for code understanding and generation. In Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,2023. Yan, L., Head, A., Milne, K., Le, V., Gulwani, S., Parnin, C., and Murphy-Hill, E. The invisible mentor: Inferring user actions from screen recordings to recommend better workflows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.26557 , 2025. 11 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

# A. Domain and Dataset 

Evaluating misconception diagnosis on real human behavior is challenging because the student’s true internal misconception is often unobserved. We therefore construct controlled planning domains in which we can explicitly generate both (i) different student knowledge models, by perturbing the expert PDDL to introduce known misconceptions, and (ii) different student behaviors, by planning under those perturbed knowledge models and augmenting the resulting plans with diverse valid action permutations. This setup gives us ground-truth knowledge gaps while still exposing SENSEI to behavioral variation across agents and trajectories. Using established benchmarks (Overcooked, IPC Rover) and a custom Breakfast task, we test compositional generalization of SENSEI across distinct and overlapping misconceptions. Our three misconception categories ( Type , Hazard , Skill , as described in Section 5.1) captures common ways symbolic task knowledge can fail: misclassifying object types, ignoring negative effects, or lacking an executable capability. Each misconception was authored and verified by humans to ensure logical consistency. Each of these misconceptions maps to a unique known set of gap components and induces a distinct family of agent behaviors. To avoid evaluating only a single canonical trajectory per student model, we augment each student’s plan with diverse, valid action permutations that preserve task feasibility. In this section, we provide detailed descriptions of each task and misconceptions, additional dataset details, and an example of PDDL snippets and a plan from a student with two misconceptions. 

A.1. Task Domains 

The task domains and misconceptions used to evaluate SENSEI are detailed below: A.1.1. B REAKFAST TASK 

The agent is tasked to prepare breakfast by cooking an omelet, topping it with tomato sauce, and serving milk in a mug. Objects in the environment include two variants of eggs (raw, boiled), canned tomato sauce, two variants of milk (fresh, spoiled), two variants of bowls (microwave-safe, microwave-unsafe), a plate, a pan, a mug, sugar, salt, and two variants of cleaning supplies (sponge, metal brush). Agents can determine the correct variant of eggs and seasoning (sugar and salt) by taking verification actions. The expert plan is as follows:                                    

> (verify_is_salt salt1) (verify_is_raw_egg raw_egg1) (serve_milk_fresh milk2 cup1) (crack_egg_raw raw_egg1 bowl2) (beat_egg raw_egg1 bowl2) (season_egg_with_salt raw_egg1 salt1 bowl2) (preheat_pan pan1) (transfer_ingredient raw_egg1 bowl2 pan1) (cook_ingredient_in_preheated raw_egg1 pan1) (plate_egg raw_egg1 pan1 plate1) (open_can tomatosauce1) (dump_can_to tomatosauce1 bowl1) (microwave_ingredient_safe tomatosauce1 bowl1) (add_topping raw_egg1 tomatosauce1 bowl1) (clean_container_soft pan1 sponge1) (clean_container_harsh_damaging bowl2 metal_brush1) (clean_container_harsh_damaging bowl1 metal_brush1) (end_task)
> Listing 1. Breakfast expert plan

Below are the descriptions of 11 unique misconceptions simulated for the Breakfast task, categorized as hazard , skill , or 

type (see Sec. 5.1): 1. Unsafe Microwaving ( Hazard ): Student does not know microwaving a microwave-unsafe bowl causes damage. 12 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

2. Harmful Cleaning ( Hazard ): Student does not know that using a metal brush on a pan scratches the pan. 3. Stubborn Sticking ( Hazard ): Student does not know cooking food in a non-preheated pan causes stubborn sticking. 4. No Clean Skill ( Skill ): Student does not know how to clean tools used for cooking. 5. No Crack Egg Skill ( Skill ): Student does not know how to crack eggs. 6. No Open Can Skill ( Skill ): Student does not know how to open a can. 7. No Egg Verify Skill ( Skill ): Student does not know how to check if an egg is raw or boiled without cracking it. 8. No Spice Verify Skill ( Skill ): Student does not know how to check if a seasoning is salt or sugar. 9. Fresh-Spoiled Confusion ( Type ): Student thinks milk1 is fresh and milk2 is spoiled. 10. Salt-Sugar Confusion ( Type ): Student thinks salt1 item is sugar and sugar1 item is salt. 11. Raw-Boiled Confusion ( Type ): Student thinks the raw egg is boiled and the boiled egg is raw. A.1.2. O VERCOOKED 

The task consists of placing 2 onions and 1 tomato into a pot, cooking the soup, plating the soup, and delivering it to a serving location. Doors in the environment unlock shortcut paths to each item, and the agent must take shortcut paths whenever possible. Additionally, tomatoes and dishes must be handled with care, as they are delicate items. The expert plan is as follows:                                                                                                      

> (move_to_door_onion p1 start_loc loc7 door1) (open_door_onion p1 loc7 door1) (move_to_onion_dispenser_short p1 loc7 loc1 onion_d1 door1) (pickup_onion_from_dispenser_careless_harmless p1 loc1 onion_d1) (move_to_pot p1 loc1 loc2 pot1) (place_onion_in_pot p1 loc2 pot1) (move_to_onion_dispenser_short p1 loc2 loc1 onion_d1 door1) (pickup_onion_from_dispenser_careless_harmless p1 loc1 onion_d1) (move_to_pot p1 loc1 loc2 pot1) (place_onion_in_pot p1 loc2 pot1) (move_to_door_tomato p1 loc2 loc8 door2) (open_door_tomato p1 loc8 door2) (move_to_tomato_dispenser_short p1 loc8 loc4 tomato_d1 door2) (pickup_tomato_from_dispenser_careful_needed p1 loc4 tomato_d1) (move_to_pot p1 loc4 loc2 pot1) (place_tomato_in_pot p1 loc2 pot1) (cook_soup p1 loc2 pot1) (cook_soup p1 loc2 pot1) (cook_soup p1 loc2 pot1) (finished_cooking_correct_recipe p1 loc2 pot1) (move_to_door_dish p1 loc2 loc9 door3) (open_door_dish p1 loc9 door3) (move_to_dish_dispenser_short p1 loc9 loc3 dish_d1 door3) (pickup_dish_from_dispenser_careful_needed p1 loc3 dish_d1) (move_to_pot p1 loc3 loc2 pot1) (pickup_correct_soup p1 loc2 pot1) (move_to_serve_counter p1 loc2 loc5 serve_c1) (serve_correct_soup p1 loc5 serve_c1) (end_task)
> Listing 2. Overcooked expert plan

Below are the descriptions of 7 unique misconceptions simulated for the Overcooked task, categorized as hazard , skill , or 

type (see Sec. 5.1): 1. Careless Dish ( Hazard ): Student does not know that dishes should be picked up carefully. 13 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

2. Careless Tomato ( Hazard ): Student does not know that tomatoes should be picked up carefully. 3. No Open Dish Door ( Skill ): Student does not know how to open the door to the dishes. 4. No Open Onion Door ( Skill ): Student does not know how to open the door to the onions. 5. No Open Tomato Door ( Skill ): Student does not know how to open the door to the tomatoes. 6. Onion-Tomato Confusion ( Type ): Student thinks onions are tomatoes and tomatoes are onions. 7. Counter Confusion ( Type ): Student thinks the white counter is the serving counter. A.1.3. R OVER 

The task is a modified IPC Rovers domain where a rover must navigate among waypoints to collect soil and rock samples, take images of scientific targets, and transmit all results back to a lander. Objects include the rover, a set of waypoints, sample targets (soil/rock), image targets, a camera and calibration object, a lab module, and a lander communication endpoint. To induce diverse plan signatures under misconceptions, we add a lightweight capacity/communication structure: the rover has a limited onboard store that must be emptied between samples, and communication requires establishing a link that occupies a shared channel until explicitly released (with an optional relay mode enabled by a dedicated action). Additionally, imaging requires camera calibration, and sample analysis requires warming up the lab, creating structured precondition dependencies that are violated under hazard-style misconceptions and detoured under cost-based skill misconceptions. The expert plan is as follows:                                                                                                            

> (calibrate_camera r1 cam1 cal_obj w2) (enable_relay) (warm_up_lab r1 w2) (sample_soil_direct r1 s2 soil1 w2) (navigate r1 w2 w1) (establish_link r1 l1 w1) (communicate_soil r1 l1 w1 soil1) (navigate r1 w1 w4) (mark_communicated_soil soil1) (advance_to_next_item soil1 rock1) (sample_rock_direct r1 s1 rock1 w4) (release_channel w1 l1) (navigate r1 w4 w1) (establish_link r1 l1 w1) (communicate_rock r1 l1 w1 rock1) (navigate r1 w1 w4) (mark_communicated_rock rock1) (empty_store r1 s2) (advance_to_next_item rock1 soil2) (sample_soil_direct r1 s2 soil2 w4) (release_channel w1 l1) (navigate r1 w4 w1) (establish_link r1 l1 w1) (communicate_soil r1 l1 w1 soil2) (navigate r1 w1 w4) (mark_communicated_soil soil2) (empty_store r1 s1) (navigate r1 w4 w3) (advance_to_next_item soil2 rock2) (sample_rock_direct r1 s1 rock2 w3) (navigate r1 w3 w4) (release_channel w1 l1) (navigate r1 w4 w1) (establish_link r1 l1 w1) (communicate_rock r1 l1 w1 rock2) (navigate r1 w1 w4) (mark_communicated_rock rock2) (advance_to_next_item rock2 obja) (take_color_image_std r1 cam1 obja cal_obj w4)

14 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization                                         

> (release_channel w1 l1) (navigate r1 w4 w1) (establish_link r1 l1 w1) (communicate_color_image r1 l1 w1 obja) (mark_communicated_color_image obja) (navigate r1 w1 w2) (navigate r1 w2 w3) (advance_to_next_item obja objb) (take_high_image_std r1 cam1 objb cal_obj w3) (release_channel w1 l1) (navigate r1 w3 w2) (establish_link r1 l1 w2) (communicate_high_image r1 l1 w2 objb) (mark_communicated_high_image objb) (end_task)
> Listing 3. Rover expert plan

Below are the descriptions of 13 unique misconceptions simulated for the Overcooked task, categorized as hazard , skill , or 

type (see Sec. 5.1): 1. Camera Calibration ( Hazard ): The student is unaware that the camera must be calibrated before use, so it skips camera calibration and takes uncalibrated images. 2. Channel Busy ( Hazard ): The student is missing knowledge related to the “channel busy” constraint, typically causing it to ignore channel conflicts or avoid direct links in favor of relays. 3. Establish Link ( Hazard ): The student believes “establish link” does not consume the channel (infinite capacity), so it repeatedly establishes links without releasing them. 4. Lab Warmup ( Hazard ): ”The student is unaware that the lab must be warmed up before analysis, so it skips “warmup lab” and attempts raw processing. 5. Clear Channel ( Hazard ): ”The student forgets that “release channel” clears the established link, leading to the channel being used when it is already occupied. 6. Empty Storage ( Hazard ): The student fails to realize that it must empty the store before taking new samples, leading it to ’mix’ objects in the store rather than clearing them. 7. Costly Soil Communicate ( Skill ): The student believes “communicate soil” is very costly, so it chooses to “relay soil” instead. 8. Costly Soil Relay ( Skill ): The student believes “relay soil” is very costly, so it forces itself to use the direct “communicate soil” action. 9. Costly Release Channel ( Skill ): The student believes “release channel” is expensive, causing it to avoid releasing the channel whenever possible. 10. Costly Rock Sample ( Skill ): The student believes sampling rock directly is expensive, so it uses the alternative raw sampling method. 11. Costly Soil Sample ( Skill ): The student believes sampling soil directly is expensive, so it uses the alternative raw sampling method. 12. Costly Color Image ( Skill ): The student believes taking standard color images is expensive, so it captures uncalibrat-ed/raw images instead. 13. Costly High-Res Image ( Skill ): The student believes taking standard high-res images is expensive, so it captures uncalibrated/raw images instead. 15 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

A.2. Summary of Dataset 

The number of knowledge components (# Components), the number of components with simulated gaps (# Gap Components), and the number of unique student plans for 1, 2, and 3 misconceptions (1-Misconception, 2-Misconception, 3-Misconception, respectively) are summarized in Table 3. The 1-Misconception data are used for training, and all other data are used purely for evaluation. 1-Misconception 2-Misconception 3-Misconception # Components # Gap Components Breakfast 550 2646 0 26 13 Overcooked 168 552 0 51 7Rover 13 50 43 34 17  

> Table 3. Summary of each dataset

A.3. Sample Student Plans and PDDL Snippets 

Below is an example of a student with Salt-Sugar Confusion ( Type misconception) and No Spice Verify Skill ( Skill 

misconception), simulated in the Breakfast task. In the student PDDL, the object types of sugar1 and salt1 are swapped in the student’s objects block, indicating type confusion. To simulate the missing spice-verification skill, we assign a prohibitively high cost to the verify is salt and verify is sugar actions in the student PDDL. Since the planner minimizes total cost, it avoids these verification actions and generates a plan as if the student does not check the identity of the spices. As a result, the student may season the egg with sugar1 instead of salt1 , without first verifying which seasoning is which.                                               

> ### Expert PDDL Snippet ### (:objects raw_egg1 -raw_egg boiled_egg1 -boiled_egg tomatosauce1 -tomatosauce milk1 -spoiled_milk milk2 -fresh_milk bowl1 bowl2 -bowl plate1 -plate pan1 -pan cup1 -cup sugar1 -sugar salt1 -salt sponge1 metal_brush1 -cleaner )(:action verify_is_salt :parameters (?s -seasoning) :precondition (and (is_cooking) (is_salt ?s) ):effect (and (verified_salt ?s) ))(:action verify_is_sugar :parameters (?s -seasoning) :precondition (and (is_cooking) (is_sugar ?s) ):effect (and (verified_sugar ?s) ))

16 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

### Student PDDL Snippet ### (:objects raw_egg1 - raw_egg boiled_egg1 - boiled_egg tomatosauce1 - tomatosauce milk1 - spoiled_milk milk2 - fresh_milk bowl1 bowl2 - bowl plate1 - plate pan1 - pan cup1 - cup sugar1 - salt # <- Does not know which item is salt or sugar salt1 - sugar sponge1 metal_brush1 - cleaner )(:action verify_is_salt :parameters (?s - seasoning) :precondition (and (is_cooking) (is_salt ?s) ):effect (and (verified_salt ?s) (increase (total-cost) 10000) # <- Prohibitive action cost ))(:action verify_is_sugar :parameters (?s - seasoning) :precondition (and (is_cooking) (is_sugar ?s) ):effect (and (verified_sugar ?s) (increase (total-cost) 10000) # <- Prohibitive action cost ))

Listing 4. Breakfast task combined Type and Skill misconception PDDL example 

(verify_is_raw_egg raw_egg1) (serve_milk_fresh milk2 cup1) (crack_egg_raw raw_egg1 bowl2) (beat_egg raw_egg1 bowl2) (season_egg_with_salt raw_egg1 sugar1 bowl2) # <- Student seasons egg with sugar (preheat_pan pan1) (transfer_ingredient raw_egg1 bowl2 pan1) (cook_ingredient_in_preheated raw_egg1 pan1) (plate_egg raw_egg1 pan1 plate1) (open_can tomatosauce1) (dump_can_to tomatosauce1 bowl1) (microwave_ingredient_safe tomatosauce1 bowl1) (add_topping raw_egg1 tomatosauce1 bowl1) (clean_container_soft pan1 sponge1) (clean_container_harsh_damaging bowl2 metal_brush1) (clean_container_harsh_damaging bowl1 metal_brush1) 

Listing 5. Breakfast task combined Type and Skill misconception student plan example 

# B. SENSEI Implementation and Training Details 

B.1. Knowledge and Behavior Encoder ( fenc )

We directly use a pretrained CodeT5+ encoder as our knowledge and behavior encoder without finetuning. 17 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

B.2. Localization Network ( floc )

The localization network is a pre-layer-normalized, three-layer MLP. The concatenated inputs (zE , z S , ∆z, e Ei , e G) are first normalized with layer norm (Ba et al., 2016), then passed, followed by two hidden linear layers with GELU (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016) activations and 0.1 dropout. The final linear layer produces a scalar output ˆgi. The hidden layer dimension is 512. In the gap localization BCE loss ( Lloc ), positive samples are defined as samples with identifiable knowledge gaps, and all other samples are considered negative samples. Lloc is designed to give a 3 times larger weight to positive samples than to negative samples to compensate for the imbalanced number of components with and without gaps. The weight of each gap component is also adjusted according to the number of identifiable time steps to balance the contributions from different misconceptions. For the mixup generalization loss ( Lmix ), “psuedo-multi-misconception” embedding zmix is generated by linearly interpolat-ing between source embeddings zA and zB as zmix = αz A + (1 − αz B ), where α ∼ U [0 , 1] .The two losses are weighted equally ( λmix = 1 ), and the network is trained with a learning rate of 0.0001 .

B.3. Latent Knowledge Editor Network ( fedit )

The latent knowledge editor network is a two-layer MLP with pre-layer normalization. The concatenated inputs 

(zE , z S , ∆z, e Ei , e G) are first normalized using layer norm, then passed through a linear projection followed by a GELU nonlinearity. Dropout 0.1 is applied to the hidden representation, and a final linear layer maps the hidden features to the output embedding space. The hidden layer dimension is 256, and the network weights are zero-initialized. Both editor network losses are weighted equally ( λno-op = 1 ), and the network is training with a learning rate of 0.0001 

B.4. Student Knowledge Decoder Network ( fdec )

We initialize the decoder from a pretrained CodeT5+ model, and prepend a learnable projection layer (with pre-layer-norm and tanh activation) to adapt the input representation. The decoder and the projection layer are first pretrained jointly on our dataset. Then the decoder is frozen, and only the projection layer is finetuned together with the remaining model components. Each component is trained with a learning rate of 0.0005. 

# C. Additional Experiments 

C.1. Impact of Detection Sensitivity on Recall–Precision Trade-Off 

In our primary evaluation, we defined a knowledge gap as detected if the localization network predicted a probability > 0.5

for a single timestep. This standard classification setting maximizes the Sys rec for SENSEI, ensuring the system identifies as many knowledge gaps as possible. However, while high recall is crucial for safety-critical domains where missing errors are risky, precision may be a higher priority in settings like human-AI collaboration (where minimizing erroneous corrections is essential for maintaining user trust) or time-critical settings (where users cannot afford to go through many erroneous guidance). To address this, we perform a grid search over two hyperparameters to analyze the impact of varying the guidance guidelines: • Detection Threshold ( pthresh ): defines the minimum probability required to flag a gap (swept from 0.1 to 0.95 ). The second parameter, temporal consistency ( k), is the number of consecutive time steps a gap must be detected before providing guidance (swept from 1 to 5). • Temporal Consistency ( k): the number of consecutive time steps a gap must be detected before providing guidance (swept from 1 to 5). Fig. 4 illustrates the system-level precision-recall trade-off for the Breakfast, Overcooked, and Rover tasks. We observe that increasing each parameter increases the precision. While our chosen setting ( pthresh = 0 .5, k = 1 ) achieves the highest recall, this comes at the cost of lower precision. To achieve high precision ( > 80% ), which effectively minimizes erroneous corrections, the system operates at a conservative recall of approximately 60% . This trade-off highlights the tunability of SENSEI to both high-recall and high-precision settings. 18 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization         

> (a) Breakfast (b) Overcooked (c) Rover
> Figure 4. System Recall-Precision Trade-off. Our chosen setting that maximizes system recall is indicated by the vertical line ( pthresh = 0 .5)and dark purple graph ( k= 1 ).

We further analyze the performance limit of SENSEI and the ablation models by tuning k and pthresh for the highest F1 score. Results are summarized in Table 4. When optimized for the F1 score, SENSEI outperforms other ablations in the Overcooked and Rover tasks. While No-Expert-Traj and No-Expert ablations achieve a higher F1 score for the Breakfast task, SENSEI achieves the highest score on average across the three tasks, indicating robustness of the SENSEI architecture.                                                                                      

> Table 4. Performance of maximum F1 score settings for ablation models, reported per domain and as the average of all domains.
> kpthresh Sys rec (↑)Sys prec (↑)Sys F1
> Breakfast No-Mixup 20.8 0.203 0.999 0.337 No-Expert-Traj 20.5 0.628 0.950 0.756
> No-Expert 10.5 0.627 0.950 0.755
> SENSEI 20.6 0.624 0.897 0.736 Overcooked No-Mixup 10.95 0.643 0.878 0.742 No-Expert-Traj 10.5 0.746 0.714 0.730 No-Expert 30.5 0.668 0.770 0.715
> SENSEI 20.6 0.760 0.807 0.783
> Rover No-Mixup 20.7 0.410 0.844 0.552 No-Expert-Traj 50.7 0.637 0.471 0.545 No-Expert 10.7 0.658 0.614 0.635
> SENSEI 50.95 0.594 0.887 0.712
> 3 Task Avg No-Mixup --0.419 0.907 0.573 No-Expert-Traj --0.670 0.712 0.690 No-Expert --0.651 0.778 0.709
> SENSEI --0.659 0.863 0.747

C.2. Incremental Trajectory Training for Causal Sensitivity 

In our primary experiments, we train the model on incremental trajectory prefixes (sub-sequences τ0: t, where t ∈ { 1, ..., N })rather than only on complete plans, and designate a gap as “detected” if the localization module identifies a component as a gap at any time step within the trajectory. This design choice is motivated by the need for causal localization. We hypothesize that training on full plans encourages the model to learn spurious correlations between the final state and the error label rather than understanding the procedural deviation. By training on increments, we provide dense supervision, forcing the model to distinguish exactly when atrajectory transitions from optimal to suboptimal. This teaches the model to associate specific cues in the plan to the cause 

of the error, leading to stronger compositional generalization capabilities. To validate this hypothesis, we train a Full-Plan variant of SENSEI using as input full trajectory traces τ0: N only, rather than trajectory increments τ0: t. System performance for the Full-Plan model and SENSEI are presented in Table 5. Empirically, we observe that full-plan training leads to unstable performance: while the full-plan variant performs better than SENSEI for the Rover task in recall (and performs similarly to SENSEI in precision), the system is over-conservative 19 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

in identifying gaps for Breakfast, and exhibits high erroneous localization in Overcooked. In contrast, our incremental trajectory training strategy consistently balances recall and precision, supporting that localizing and correcting errors as they unfold is essential for robust error identification.                         

> Table 5. Effect of Incremental Trajectory Training Sys rec (↑)Sys prec (↑)Sys F1
> Breakfast Full-Plan 0.471 0.928 0.625
> SENSEI 0.762 0.663 0.709 Overcooked Full-Plan 0.606 0.297 0.399
> SENSEI 0.828 0.646 0.726 Rover Full-Plan 0.884 0.456 0.602
> SENSEI 0.727 0.457 0.561

C.3. Effect of Removing ∆z from Model Inputs 

In addition to the individual behavior embeddings of the expert and the student ( zE , z S ), we provide their different ( ∆z)as inputs to the localization and editing modules. The rationale for this design choice was to inject an inductive bias encouraging the model to focus on behavioral “differences.” However, explicitly providing ∆z is theoretically not necessary as it is collinear to zE and zS . The effect of removing ∆z is evaluated ( No-∆z), and the results are shown in Table 6. The results of other ablation experiments are repeated for reference. Removing ∆z resulted in mixed but encouraging outcomes. Compared to SENSEI, while the system recall decreased for the Breakfast and Overcooked tasks, precision increased for the Breakfast and Rover tasks, resulting in improved F1 scores.                                                   

> Table 6. Effect of Removing ∆zfrom Model Inputs Sys rec (↑)Sys prec (↑)Sys F1 (↑)
> Breakfast No-Mixup 0.221 0.954 0.359 No-Expert-Traj 0.673 0.793 0.728 No-Expert 0.635 0.923 0.752 No-∆z0.688 0.848 0.759 SENSEI 0.762 0.663 0.709 Overcooked No-Mixup 0.690 0.707 0.698 No-Expert-Traj 0.774 0.670 0.718 No-Expert 0.747 0.672 0.708 No-∆z0.788 0.637 0.704
> SENSEI 0.828 0.646 0.726
> Rover No-Mixup 0.457 0.743 0.566 No-Expert-Traj 0.673 0.365 0.473 No-Expert 0.680 0.512 0.584 No-∆z0.815 0.543 0.652 SENSEI 0.727 0.457 0.561

C.4. Random Baseline with Adjusted Detection Threshold 

The Random-Loc baseline evaluated in the main paper declares each knowledge component as a gap with 50% probability at each plan time step. We consider a knowledge component to be labeled as a gap if it was declared as a gap at any point in the plan. Since the Random-Loc baseline labels most components as a gap at some point in the plan, it results in near-perfect localization recall and low localization precision. Here, we evaluate an alternative random localization baseline (Random-Avg) that uses a gap identification probability such that the expected number of gaps detected matches the average number of gaps seen in students in the training set. Results are shown in Table 7. As expected, the Random-Avg setting results in significantly lower Loc rec and Sys false , and limited effect on Loc prec . The F1 scores decrease for all tasks when compared to Random-Loc, further supporting that localization is not a trivial task. 20 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization                                                                   

> Table 7. Random localization baseline with adjusted gap identification probability
> Loc rec (↑)Loc prec (↑)Loc F1 (↑)Edit acc (↑)Edit no-op (↑)Sys rec (↑)Sys prec (↑)Sys F1 (↑)Sys false (↓)
> Breakfast Random-Loc 0.997 0.104 0.188 0.875 0.0 0.875 0.092 0.166 0.999 Random-Avg 0.040 0.093 0.056 0.920 0.0 0.037 0.085 0.052 0.046 Overcooked Random-Loc 1.0 0.040 0.077 0.925 0.0 0.925 0.036 0.069 1.0 Random-Avg 0.026 0.053 0.035 0.930 0.0 0.024 0.049 0.032 0.019 Rover Random-Loc 1.0 0.088 0.162 0.940 0.040 0.939 0.083 0.153 0.957 Random-Avg 0.048 0.083 0.061 1.0 0.03 0.048 0.083 0.061 0.049

# D. User Study Details 

20 users (3 females, 17 males), ages 20 to 30, participated in the study. 

D.1. Modified Overcooked AI Environment 

The original environment (typically for multi-agent collaboration) was modified for a single-player setting, and the user control inputs were changed from keyboard input to a point-and-click UI. To support a wider range of misconceptions, we additionally implemented “doors” that unlock shortcut paths to items when opened, as well as a distractor white counter object (the same color as the serving location, but it is a regular counter) and a hidden serving location (same color as regular counters). Finally, we implemented a “careful” version of the “pick up” action that must be used when picking up items that must be handled with care (a list of items was provided to the users). The Overcooked environment used in the user study is shown in Fig. 5. The user’s actions in the environment (e.g., move to pot, cook soup, open door to onion, etc.) were converted to a PDDL-solution-style symbolic plan to feed into SENSEI for localization and correction. 

D.2. Induced Misconceptions 

All users were given the same tutorial material, which went through how to open unlocked doors, pick up items (“carefully” and regularly), place items into the pot, cook the soup, plate the soup, and serve the soup. For each group, we induced 2 misconceptions by either withholding certain information or by modifying the environment. The following misconceptions were used: • No Open Onion Door : Door to the onions are locked via a change in the environment. The door is openable by pressing the “A” key in front of the doors, but users are not told how to open the doors. • No Open Tomato Door : Same as above, but for the door to the tomatoes. • No Open Dish Door : Same as above, but for the door to the dishes. • Careless Tomato : Tomatoes require “careful” pickup, but this information was not given to the users. • Careless Dish : Dishes require “careful” pickup, but this information was not given to the users. • Counter Confusion : The serving location was hidden by making it the same color as the surrounding counters. One of the standard colors was changed to the serving location color to serve as a distractor. 

D.3. User Study Procedure 

Users were first asked to complete a pre-study survey, followed by a step-by-step tutorial task to familiarize themselves with the interface. The users then completed the first trial (Study 1) with 2 misconceptions, and SENSEI printed targeted guidance to a terminal. The users completed the second trial (Study 2) after reading SENSEI’s guidance, then concluded with a post-study survey. Natural language guidance was generated by using a predefined mapping from a predicted (localized and corrected) PDDL block to a guidance text. When the system predicted one of the misconceptions from Section D.2, a corresponding guidance message is printed out to the terminal. If a predicted misconception was not one of the expected misconceptions defined in the mapping, the system outputs a placeholder guidance saying “A knowledge gap was detected, but there is no additional information that can be disclosed.” The guidance text corresponding to each misconception is listed below: 21 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

• No Open Onion Door : “If the DOOR to the ONION does not open by clicking, it opens by pressing the ‘a’ key in front of the door.” • No Open Tomato Door : “If the DOOR to the TOMATO does not open by clicking, it opens by pressing the ‘a’ key in front of the door.” • No Open Dish Door : “If the DOOR to the DISH does not open by clicking, it opens by pressing the ‘a’ key in front of the door.” • Careless Tomato : “A TOMATO should be handled with care. Use the CAREFUL ACTION to pick up the tomato.” • Careless Dish : “A DISH should be handled with care. Use the CAREFUL ACTION to pick up the dish.” • Counter Confusion : “The SERVING COUNTER is the lower-most grid on the right-most column.” 

D.4. Per-Group Quantitative Results 

Misconception assignments to each group in the user study are as follows: G1 (No Open Door Tomato, No Open Door Dish), G2 (No Open Door Dish, Careless Tomato), G3 (Careless Tomato, Careless Dish), G4 (No Open Door Onion, Counter Confusion). Per-group system recall ( Sys rec ), system precision ( Sys prec ), and plan alignment scores IoU pre (before guidance) and IoU post (after guidance) are shown in Table 8.  

> Table 8. Per-Group User Study Results. Each row contains the mean and variance of metrics across 5 subjects for each group (G). The final row are mean and variance across all 20 subjects.

Sys rec Sys prec IoU pre IoU post 

G1 0.900 ±0.050 0.533 ±0.089 0.711 ±0.010 0.806 ±0.001 

G2 0.800 ±0.075 0.466 ±0.019 0.759 ±0.003 0.824 ±0.010 

G3 1.000 ±0.000 0.600 ±0.022 0.805 ±0.004 0.932 ±0.011 

G4 0.900 ±0.050 0.640 ±0.123 0.666 ±0.002 0.819 ±0.004 

All 0.895 ±0.042 0.555 ±0.058 0.736 ±0.007 0.844 ±0.008 

D.5. Post-Study Survey 

Users were asked to complete a post-study survey following their participation in the experiment. The following questions were asked: Q1. How many of the additional tips did you find helpful? Q2. How many of the additional tips did you NOT find helpful? Q3. Overall, how helpful were the additional tips in providing you with information you did not know? (Likert scale from 1-5 where 1 is “not helpful at all” and 5 is “extremely helpful”) Q4. Overall, how annoying were the additional tips? Please rate the content, disregarding wording and tone. (Likert scale from 1-5 where 1 is “not annoying at all” and 5 is “very annoying”) Post-study survey responses averaged across 20 users are summarized in Table 9. 

# E. Off-the-Shelf LLM Baseline Details 

Here we provide additional details on the off-the-shelf LLM baselines. First, each LLM model is prompted with the system prompt shown in Listing 6 to identify PDDL blocks where knowledge gaps exist, and output a rewritten PDDL block and a natural language description of the student misconception for each identified gap block. Each output student PDDL block was extracted, and all blocks correctly identified as gaps were evaluated according to three different criteria of varying flexibility: 22 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization  

> Table 9. Post-Study Survey Results

Question Response Q1 1.91 ± 0.087 

Q2 1.64 ± 2.340 

Q3 4.27 ± 0.589 

Q4 2.27 ± 1.160  

> Figure 5. User study environment. Users can click on items to move to and interact with items in the scene. The recipe is displayed at the bottom of the screen.

• Semantic Equivalence (most strict): Two PDDL blocks are considered equivalent if they are semantically identical (invariant to spacing or ordering irrelevant to the definition of the block). This is the criterion used to evaluate all methods in the main paper. • Conceptual Equivalence (middle ground): Two PDDL blocks are considered equivalent if they express the same effects. For example, the LLM adds an extra (no_need_careful) predicate to the action precondition and removes a negative effect (harmless_pickup) , where the ground truth only removes the negative effect. While this edit results in an invalid PDDL (by using undefined predicates), the conceptual meaning interpreted from the two PDDL blocks is equivalent. • Explanation Equivalence (most lenient): This criterion compares the LLM-generated description of the student misconception in the edited PDDL block to a set of ground truth misconception descriptions in Appendix A.1. GPT-4o was prompted with each of the evaluation prompts (Listings 7, 8, 9) to measure the correction success of the LLM baselines under the three criteria. Results are shown in Table 10. Note that the system metrics are conditioned on the localization accuracy ( Loc rec ), which is independent of the evaluation criteria presented here. As described in the main results (Table 1), the primary performance bottleneck for these baselines is Loc rec . However, we adopt this evaluation metric to evaluate the LLM baselines for the same task as other methods (localization and correction). 23 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

Table 10. Off-the-Shelf LLM Baseline Results for Semantic, Concept, and Explanation Metrics Sys rec (↑) Sys prec (↑) Sys F 1(↑)

GPT-4o Breakfast Semantic 0.077 0.177 0.107 Concept 0.084 0.194 0.117 Explanation 0.1015 0.242 0.144 Overcooked Semantic 0.005 0.005 0.005 Concept 0.010 0.011 0.010 Explanation 0.100 0.106 0.103 Rover Semantic 0.0 0.0 0.0 Concept 0.0 0.0 0.0 Explanation 0.008 0.016 0.011 GPT-5.2 Breakfast Semantic 0.101 0.166 0.126 Concept 0.101 0.166 0.126 Explanation 0.126 0.206 0.156 Overcooked Semantic 0.085 0.069 0.076 Concept 0.085 0.069 0.076 Explanation 0.215 0.175 0.193 Rover Semantic 0.0 0.0 0.0 Concept 0.004 0.009 0.006 Explanation 0.016 0.034 0.022 Llama-3.3 70B Breakfast Semantic 0.007 0.013 0.009 Concept 0.024 0.044 0.031 Explanation 0.090 0.163 0.116 Overcooked Semantic 0.035 0.019 0.025 Concept 0.145 0.078 0.101 Explanation 0.095 0.051 0.066 Rover Semantic 0.0 0.0 0.0 Concept 0.008 0.014 0.010 Explanation 0.012 0.021 0.0153 

SYSTEM: You are a Cognitive Scientist and PDDL Expert analyzing a student’s behavior. CONTEXT: You have the "Expert Domain and Problem" (Ground Truth Physics), an "Expert Plan" (optimal behavior), and a "Student Plan" (trace of actions). The student has a FLAWED mental model of the domain. They believe their plan is optimal, but it is based on FALSE BELIEFS about the world. Crucially, the student’s actions are **valid PDDL transitions** in their mind, but they may be invalid or suboptimal in the real world. The "Expert Plan" is an example of an optimal plan, and is not the only optimal plan. The student’s error usually falls into one of these categories: 1. Incorrect Action Logic (e.g., wrong effects). 2. Incorrect Object Definitions (e.g., they think ’onion1’ is type ’tomato’). INPUTS: [EXPERT DOMAIN AND PROBLEM PDDL] {expert_pddl} [EXPERT PLAN] {expert_plan} [STUDENT PLAN] {student_plan} TASK: 1. Trace the plan step-by-step and compare it to optimal behavior (expert plan or equally good plan). 2. Identify the FIRST step where the student’s behavior diverges from what a rational 

24 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

expert would do. 3. INFER the specific knowledge gap(s). Note that a single behavioral error might imply multiple PDDL changes (e.g., adding an object AND changing a type). 4. For EACH inferred gap, identify the specific PDDL block (e.g., Action, Objects) and REWRITE it exactly as the student believes it to be. IMPORTANT CONSTRAINTS: - For Action definitions: Output the FULL ‘(:action ...)‘ block. - For Objects blocks: Output the FULL ‘(:objects ...)‘ block containing ALL items, not just the changed ones, so it can be parsed as valid PDDL. - Step Index: Use 0-based indexing for the plan steps. OUTPUT FORMAT: Return a single JSON object containing a list of gaps under the key "identified_gaps". Example structure: {{ "divergence_step_index": 5, "identified_gaps": [{{ "component_type": "action", "component_name": "pick-up", "explanation": "Student thinks they don’t need to hold the knife.", "student_pddl_block": "(:action pick-up ... (valid pddl) ...)" }}, {{ "component_type": "objects", "component_name": "problem_objects", "explanation": "Student believes onion1 is a tomato.", "student_pddl_block": "(:objects onion1 - tomato ...)" }} ]}} 

Listing 6. Full System Prompt for In-Context Learning Baselines 

SYSTEM: You are a PDDL Expert and Strict Logician. You are evaluating whether a "Predicted PDDL Block" is SEMANTICALLY EQUIVALENT to the " Ground Truth Block". INPUTS: [GROUND TRUTH PDDL] {true_student_chunk} [PREDICTED PDDL] {llm_predicted_chunk} TASK: Determine if the Prediction implements the **exact same logic** as the Ground Truth. - IGNORE: Whitespace, ordering of predicates, parameter names (e.g., ?p vs ?player), or minor syntax typos. - FOCUS: Are the same preconditions required? Are the same effects applied? - CRITICAL: If the Prediction adds a predicate that does not exist in the Ground Truth, or misses one, it is NOT a match. OUTPUT: Return JSON: {{ "reasoning": "Step-by-step comparison of logic...", "is_semantically_equivalent": boolean }} 

Listing 7. Full System Prompt for In-Context Learning Baseline Evaluation (Semantic) 

SYSTEM: You are a Cognitive Scientist analyzing models of student behavior. 

25 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

Your goal is to determine if a "Predicted PDDL Update" reflects the **same underlying belief** as the "Ground Truth PDDL Update", even if the implementation is different or invalid. CONTEXT: We are modeling a student who has a false belief about the world. - The **Ground Truth** is the canonical PDDL representation of this false belief. - The **Prediction** is an AI’s attempt to represent this same belief. INPUTS: [GROUND TRUTH PDDL BLOCK] {true_student_chunk} [PREDICTED PDDL BLOCK] {llm_predicted_chunk} TASK: Decide if the **agent knowledge inferred** from the Prediction is effectively the same as the Ground Truth. Ask yourself: "If a student believed the Prediction, would they behave effectively the same way as a student who believed the Ground Truth?" GUIDELINES for "MATCH" (True): 1. **Synonyms/Paraphrasing:** GT uses ‘(hand-empty)‘ but Prediction uses ‘(not (holding ?x ))‘. -> MATCH. 2. **Hallucinated Predicates:** GT uses ‘(reachable ?x)‘ but Prediction uses ‘(can-grab ?x )‘ (which doesn’t exist). The intent is clearly the same. -> MATCH. 3. **Implicit vs Explicit:** GT deletes a precondition. Prediction keeps the precondition but adds an effect that trivially satisfies it. -> MATCH. GUIDELINES for "MISMATCH" (False): 1. **Different Logic:** GT says "Student thinks they can’t fail," Prediction says "Student thinks they succeed instantly." (Subtle, but maybe different). 2. **Wrong Object:** GT refers to ‘onion1‘. Prediction refers to ‘tomato1‘. -> MISMATCH. 3. **Opposite Effect:** GT negates a predicate. Prediction makes it positive. -> MISMATCH. OUTPUT: Return JSON: {{ "inferred_belief_ground_truth": "One sentence summary of what the GT implies (e.g., ’ Agent believes holding isn’t required’).", "inferred_belief_prediction": "One sentence summary of what the Prediction implies.", "is_conceptually_equivalent": boolean }} 

Listing 8. Full System Prompt for In-Context Learning Baseline Evaluation (Concept) 

SYSTEM: You are a Cognitive Scientist evaluating student diagnosis. You have a "Ground Truth Diagnosis" (the actual misconception) and a "Predicted Diagnosis" (generated by an AI tutor). INPUTS: [GROUND TRUTH EXPLANATION] {gt_explanation} [PREDICTED EXPLANATION] {llm_explanation} TASK: Do these two explanations describe the **same underlying knowledge gap**? - TRUE: "Student thinks onion is tomato" vs "Student confuses onion object with tomato type". - FALSE: "Student thinks onion is tomato" vs "Student thinks they don’t need an onion". OUTPUT: 

26 Fix the Mind, Not the Move: Interpretable AI Assistance via Knowledge-Gap Localization 

Return JSON: {{ "reasoning": "Compare the core concept...", "is_same_knowledge_gap": boolean }} 

Listing 9. Full System Prompt for In-Context Learning Baseline Evaluation (Explanation) 

27