Title: CascadeMAP: Autonomous Closed-loop Optimization of Enzyme Cascades via Microfluidics, Machine Learning and Agentic AI

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034v1.full.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 02 Jul 2026 02:36:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
CascadeMAP: Autonomous Closed -loop Optimization of Enzyme 

# Cascades via Microfluidics , Machine Learning  and  Agentic AI 

Michal Vasina 1,2, *, David Kovar 1,2,* , Martin Kizovsky 3, *, David Lacko 1,2 , Pavel Vanacek 1, Maximilian Herich 1,

Eduard Volf 1, Luk as  Drdla 1, Sona Cabalova 3, Pavlina Sikorova 3, Michael Jir asek 4, Pavel Solansky 1, Jan 

Jezek 3, Ota Samek 3, Filip Dou sek 4, Hynek Walner 4, Pavel Zemanek 3, Andrew deMello 5, Zdenek Pilat 3, Jiri 

Damborsky 1,2 , Stavros Stavrakis 5 ✉, Stanislav Mazurenko 1,2  ✉, Zbynek  Prokop 1,2  ✉

✉ Corresponding authors: stavros.stavrakis@chem.ethz.ch, mazurenko@mail.muni.cz, 

zbynek@chemi.muni.cz  

> 1

Loschmidt Laboratories, Department of Experimental Biology and RECETOX, Faculty of Science, 

Masaryk University, 602 00 Brno, Czech Republic  

> 2

International Clinical Research Centre, St. Anne's University Hospital, 656 91 Brno, Czech Republic  

> 3

Institute of Scientific Instruments of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Kralovopolska 147, Brno 612 64, 

Czech Republic  

> 4

Theorema Inc., 838 Walker Road, Suite 21 -2, City of Dover, County of Kent, 19904,  Delaware, USA  

> 5

Institute for Chemical and Bioengineering, ETH Zürich, 8093 Zürich, Switzerland  

> *

These authors contributed equally. 

# Keywords 

active learning, autonomous experimentation, Bayesian optimization, biocatalysis, closed -loop 

optimizations, enzyme cascades, machine -learning, metabolic engineering, microfluidics, multi -agent AI 

system 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

# Abstract 

Enzyme cascades enable complex biochemical transformations, but their optimization is resource -

intensive, requiring navigation through high -dimensional parameter spaces encompassing reaction 

conditions, enzyme ratios, and buffer composition. Here we introd uce CascadeMAP, an autonomous 

microfluidic platform for closed -loop optimization of enzyme cascades, integrating high -throughput 

microfluidics with Bayesian optimization and multi -agent AI system. We demonstrate the platform across 

two cascades: (i) a glyc erol detection pathway monitored by fluorescence and (ii) a 1,2,3 -

trichloropropane degradation pathway monitored by label -free Raman spectroscopy providing 

orthogonal detection modalities. Bayesian optimization identified optimal conditions three times fas ter 

than Design of Experiments. Multi -agent AI system automated hypothesis generation, processing 11 GB 

of experimental data, pattern recognition, and insight synthesis.  Operating without human intervention 

for 7 days, CascadeMAP processed ~220,000  reactio ns  across ~7,400 different conditions. This capability 

establishes a generalizable framework for the autonomous optimization of enzyme cascades and 

metabolic pathways  and  accelerat es  the development of biocatalytic and synthetic biological systems. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

# Introduction 

Nature has composed an immense “songbook” of biotransformations, which are performed by 

enzymes  with in metabolic pathways (enzyme cascades). Th is  biosynthetic power, c haracterized by high 

selectivity  under mild conditions, has been extensively utilized by metabolic engineers in a wide range of 

industrial sectors, such as food, textile, agr iculture , chemical or pharma industries. 1 Traditionally, these 

processes relied on whole -cell metabolic engineering . However, cell -free enzyme cascades are 

increasingly utilized as a robust alternative, offering superior flexibility and fine -grained control over 

reaction variables .2,3  Despite the reduced biological complexity of cell -free systems compared to intact 

cells, the optimization of these cascades remains a significant challenge. Developing efficient biocatalytic 

systems requires the collection of high -fidelity datasets that ca pture the intricate interplay of multiple 

physicochemical parameters .4 This creates two central technical bottlenecks : (i) the  high -throughput 

generation of high -quality multidimensional datasets, and (ii) the reliable analysis of th ese  datasets  to 

extract actionable insights and identify optimal operating conditions. 

Currently, the leading technologies to tackle these challenges are microfluidic  platforms , which enable 

controlled and high -throughput experimentation, and machine learning approaches (ML),  recently 

enhanced by mutli -agent AI research assistants ,5 which ensure  efficient navigation  through  complex 

multidimensional parameter spaces. 6 Microfluidic systems have been  applied to  enzyme cascades, b ut 

their use has largely  focused on proof -of -concept demonstrations, particularly involving enzyme 

immobilization and compartmentalization strategies, rather than the systematic, multidimensional 

optimization of cascade performance. 7 In parallel,  ML -based a lgorithms  have demonstrated considerable 

potential for  multiparameter optimization of complex reaction  systems , including enzyme cascades. 8 For 

example,  the  active learning -based software METIS has been  successfully applied to optimize the CETCH 

cycle, 9 highlighting the ability of ML to accelerate optimization of complex metabolic networks. Despite 

these advances, experimental implementation of ML -guided optimization has remained largely 

constrained by the throughput, reproducibility, and autonomy of the  robotic  liquid handling  platforms. 10 

To date, integration of ML with microfluidic experimentation for enzyme cascades has been limited. 

To the best of our knowledge, the only existing fusion of these technologies in this  context is the 

microfluidic continuous stirred -tank reactor introduced by the Huck group. 11,12  Their platform enabled 

immobilization of enzymes in hydrogel beads and inferred kinetic models of enzymatic networks using 

active learning. 13  While this approach represented an important step toward data -driven analysis of 

enzyme cascades, it was primarily designed for kinetic characterization and model inference, rather than 

for fully autonomous, closed -loop experimental optimization across mu ltidimensional reaction spaces. 

Moreover, despite the iterative nature demonstrated by METIS or CSTR, these systems do not run fully 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

autonomously and require a human -in -a-loop for sample handling, reagent replenishment, or data 

transfer. 14 

We developed CascadeMAP, a microfluidic platform that combines classical design -of -experiments 

(DoE) with machine learning –guided optimization in a fully closed -loop workflow for enzyme cascade 

engineering. 15 –17  To our knowledge, CascadeMAP is the first platform to employ a multi -agent AI system 

for experimental planning, deep data analysis, and hypothesis generation within a microfluidic self -

driving laboratory. CascadeMAP enables the simultaneous, multidimensio nal optimization of key 

parameters critical for enzyme cascade development, including enzyme stoichiometry, reaction 

temperature, and pH, while autonomously executing experiments, acquiring data, and guiding 

subsequent experimental decisions.  We validated CascadeMAP using two  model systems,  a three -enzyme 

glycerol detection pathway 18  and  a three -enzyme synthetic metabolic pathway for degradation of the 

industrial and environmental pollutant  1,2,3, -trichloropropane. 19 –21  These examples demonstrate the 

ability of CascadeMAP to efficiently navigate complex experimental landscapes and autonomously 

identify optimal operating conditions in multienzyme reaction networks relevant to biocatalysis, 

biosensing, and metabolic engine ering. 

# Results 

# CascadeMAP hardware and software development 

We developed CascadeMAP, an autonomous microfluidic platform for the optimization and 

mechanistic characterization of enzyme cascade systems. The platform integrates multiple orthogonal 

detection modalities, including fluorescence -based assays and label -fr ee Raman spectroscopy, enabling 

quantitative monitoring of reaction progress and intermediate formation. CascadeMAP supports reaction 

times ranging from minutes to hours and allows systematic exploration of multidimensional reaction 

spaces. The system oper ates in both conventional design -of -experiments (DoE) mode and a fully 

autonomous active learning (AL) mode, enabling efficient, data -driven optimization of complex 

enzymatic cascades ( Figure 1 ). 

During the development, we addressed several technical challenges to enhance both the performance 

and versatility of CascadeMAP, thereby directly resolving limitations associated with conventional 

capillary‑based microfluidic architectures. In typical desi gns reported in the literature, 22 –25  aqueous 

reagents are first mixed in a manifold, and droplets are subsequently generated at a downstream T -

junction. While widely used, this approach introduces axial dispersion during transport from the mixing 

region to droplet formation . This  smearing of concentration gradients compromises temporal precision 

and necessitates long delay times to allow for transitions between distinct reaction conditions. In 

contrast, CascadeMAP integrates both aqueous and oil phases within a single manifold, co upling mixing 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

directly to droplet generation. By minimizing the dead volume between mixing and encapsulation, this 

integrated configuration substantially reduces dispersion and enables rapid, well -defined switching 

between flow rate combinations ( Figure S1 , S2 ), allowing precise temporal control of reagent delivery 

and higher fidelity in sampling, which is inherently difficult to achieve in conventional setups. 

We implemented various technical solutions to preserve sample integrity and maintain stable 

experimental conditions during extended self -driving experiments, typically lasting more than 10 hours 

(Figure S3 ). These include a refrigerated enclosure, customized syringe sleeves, and specialized syringe 

adapters ( Figure S3a -c). Although this setup required a larger physical footprint and longer tubing 

lengths, the refrigerator enabled simultaneous cooling of multiple syringes, which was essential for 

maintaining  the stability of sensitive enzymes and cofactors, ensuring a consistent signal over time, and 

allowing precise control of temperatures below room temperature ( Figure S3d -e). To accommodate 

reactions spanning longer timescales, we also integrated a flask -based incubator and a complementary 

detection cell for end -point measurements. These additions extended the versatility of CascadeMAP, 

allowing it to monitor both rapid and  slow enzymatic processes with equal precision ( Figure S4 ). 

Alongside the hardware development and optimization, we developed the MAPit software suite to 

automatically operate CascadeMAP and process the obtained data. The system enables fully autonomous 

execution of both DoE and machine learning –driven experiments,  including extended runs of up to 7 days, 

with robust, unattended operation ( Figure S5 ).  The software architecture integrates a LabVIEW‑based 

hardware control layer (National Instruments, US) with Python‑based routines responsible for inline data 

processin g and execution of the active learning algorithm. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

Figure 1 | CascadeMAP microfluidic platform for closed -loop optimization of enzyme cascades. a , The 

technical setup of the microfluidic platform. The pumps control the flow rates of aqueous phases and oil phase, 

which are mixed in the manifold (grey circle), where droplets are also generated. The droplets travel through the 

incubation (reaction) co il wrapped around a temperature‑controlled rod, where fluorescence can be read out in 

every loop of the tubing for time -resolved detection (Raman detection requir es platform setup adjustments, see 

Figure S12 ). The software MAPit controls (i) the flow rates on syringe pumps (beige lines), dictating the 

experimental mode (see  b), (ii) the reaction conditions, including temperature and reaction time (grey lines), and 

(iii) the acquisition of detected signal (blue lines). Details on control of pumps, reaction and detection are described 

below the platform scheme in beige, grey and  blue squares, respectively.  b, The experimental modes showcasing 

design of experiments (le ft) and active learning (right). Both modes are depicted as two -step processes of (i) 

defining the combinatorial space of conditions and (ii) their measurement. Typical parameters are enzyme 

concentrations (E1, E2, and E3), temperature (T), and pH. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

# Design of Experiments on CascadeMAP 

DoE optimization of the glycerol detection cascade 

As a model system, we selected the glycerol detection pathway ( Figure  2), adapted from the method 

reported by Morita and Terada. 18  This cascade involves three enzymes, glycerol kinase (GK), 

glycerolphosphate oxidase (GPO), and horseradish peroxidase (HRP), to generate a fluorescence -based 

output, well -suited for the validation of the CascadeMAP architecture. We initially tested the f luorophore 

used in the original method, Amplex Ultra -Red (AUR). Despite satisfactory results with measurements on 

the microtiter plate (MTP) reader, the utilization of AUR on CascadeMAP led to irreproducible signals 

and compromised droplet stability ( Figure  S6 ). Consistent with findings by Zhu et al., 26  we observed that 

the precipitation of AUR in narrow capillary channels poses a significant challenge for microfluidic 

applications. We therefore transitioned to aminophenyl fluorescein (APF),  a fluorogenic probe that 

becomes fluorescent upon reaction with highly reactive oxygen species such as hydroxyl radicals, 

peroxynitrite, and hypochlorite and employed in various assays .27,28  The APF was successfully validated for 

performance on both the MTP reader ( Figure  S7 ) and CascadeMAP , providing the stability and signal 

reproducibility required for all subsequent autonomous experiments. 

Our initial objective was to optimize the relative ratios of enzymes within the glycerol detection 

cascade while maintaining a constant total enzyme concentration ( Figure 2b ). First, we chose a “safe 

time -resolved detection” mode enabling time -resolved detection across multiple loops on the rod. In this 

configuration the reaction coil was first completely filled with droplets of a specific composition and only 

afterwards, a s ignal was detected for loops of choice in a backward direction to retrieve time -res olved 

fluorescence data and prevent photobleaching of the APF fluorophore ( Figure  S8b, c ). While effective for 

kinetic characterization the main drawback of this “safe time -resolved” detection mode is its relatively 

low efficiency (i.e., a low ratio of detected to generated droplets), resulting in both increased reagent 

consumption and experi mental duration ( Table  S1 ). Leveraging the improved droplet generation 

stability of CascadeMAP ( Figure  S2 ), we tested a “stepwise end -point detection” mode ( Figure  S9 ) that 

maximizes the throughput of detected droplets, significantly reducing sample requirements and total 

experimental time ( Figure  2c  and  Figure  S8d, e ). Validation experiments confirmed that both detection 

modes yielded consistent results, identifying an optimal GK:GPO:HRP ratio of approximately 2:6:2 

(Figure  S8b, e ). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

Figure 2 | The DoE optimization of the glycerol detection pathway. a , General scheme of glycerol detection 

pathway. Glycerol kinase (GK) converts glycerol (GLY) to glycerol -3-phosphate (G3P), while adenosine 

triphosphate (ATP) is dephosphorylated to adenosine diphosphate (ADP). G3P further reacts with oxygen, yielding 

dihy droxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) and hydrogen peroxide, which, catalyzed by horseradish peroxidase (HRP), 

oxidizes aminophenyl fluorescein (APF) to form well -detectable fluorescein.  b, The de sign of the experiment is 

based on a ternary plot diagram, where the axes represent enzyme ratios. The graph also shows the sequence of 

measurements from the beginning (blue point in the middle) to the end (red point in the bottom left corner).  c, The 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

resulting ternary plot from enzyme ratios optimization at 37 °C. The colormap shows the relative fluorescence 

signal translated to performance of the cascade in %.  d, The parameter space and combinations of conditions for 5 -

parameter DoE (enzyme ratios, temperature, and pH).  e, Ternary plots of 5 -parameter DoE for 6 different pH values 

(columns, expressed as ranges due to variation with temperature) and for 5 different temperatures (rows). The 

colormap shows the relative fluorescence signal in %, the same a s in  c.

Despite the straightforward data acquisition required to determine optimal enzyme ratios via a 

traditional DoE approach, conventional studies often keep other critical parameters constant. To target 

the optimization of multiple parameters within a single e xperiment, we expanded our experimental 

scope to include reaction temperatures and pH, both of which are key parameters influencing the 

performance of enzyme cascades. 7 Optimization of reaction temperature was facilitated by the 

temperature‑controlled rod -shaped incubator as introduced previously. 24,25  To vary the pH, we employed 

two separate syringes delivering 50 mM Tricine and 50 mM Bis‑Tris propane, achieving a linear pH range 

from 6.5 to 9.5.  This enabled us to successfully capture both the upper and lower activity limits of the 

cascade, ( Figure  S10 ). We initially intended to monitor pH using a PVDF 50 Microliter flow cell 

(Sensorex, USA) ( Figure  S11 ). However, its large internal volume introduced significant dispersion and 

mixing delays. Consequently, we decided to calibrate the pH changes offline ( Figure  S10 ) and due to pH 

dependence on temperature we subsequently extended this calibration to cover multiple reaction 

temperatures ( Table S2 ). 

Building upon the initial enzyme ratio screenings, we expanded the DoE to combinatorially explore 

five parameters: 22 different enzyme ratios, 5 different temperatures, and 6 different pH levels  - in total 

660 unique reaction conditions ( Figure 2d ). This exhaustive screening was completed in approximately 

12 hours using endpoint measurements, identifying the optimum at 25 °C and a pH 7.6 ( Figure  2e ). 

DoE optimization of the TCP degradation pathway 

To expand the application scope of CascadeMAP, we combined the glycerol detection pathway with a 

previously kinetically characterized synthetic metabolic pathway for degradation of 1,2,3 -

trichloropropane (TCP pathway) ( Figure 3a ). 19  To accommodate the longer reaction times from 5 to 

approximately 30 min, required for TCP conversion to glycerol, we implemented a heated reaction zone 

with an end -point detection cell ( Figure  S4 ). Optimization of the TCP pathway enzyme ratios ( Figure  3c )

yielded results consistent with previously reported optimal ratios ( Figure  3b ). 19 

To demonstrate the versatility of CascadeMAP beyond fluorescence -based detection, we adapted the 

system to label -free monitoring of the TCP pathway using Raman spectroscopy ( Figure S12 ). This 

required integrating a glass capillary into the setup to define a stable detection zone ( Figure  S12b ), 

developing a specialized capillary –tubing interface that preserved droplet monodispersity 

(Figure  S12c ), and implementing custom software for automated real -time spectral acquisition and 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

processing. To enable the continuous detection of low concentrations of metabolites in flowing droplets, 

we employed a high -power Raman microspectrometer developed at the Czech Academy of Science (ISI 

CAS, Brno, Czech Republic), featuring a 6 W laser. To o ur knowledge, this high -power approach has not 

previously been applied to enhance Raman sensitivity in microfluidic droplet systems, enabling the 

analysis of metabolites at concentrations below the limit of detection (LOD) of conventional Raman 

spectromete rs. 

By leveraging the label -free detection capabilities of Raman spectroscopy, we successfully detected 

the substrate (TCP), the first intermediate ( R,S )-2,3 -dichloropropane -1-ol (DCP), and the product 

glycerol (GLY) in real -time. While other intermediates ( Figure 3a ) were also detectable as neat 

compounds ( Figure 3e,f, Figure S13, Table S3 ) their concentration in the reaction mixture was below 

the LOD, indicating they did not significantly accumulate during the cascade ( Figure S14  and  S15, 

Table  S3 ). The optim ization of enzyme stoichiometry using Raman -based detection ( Figure  3d, 

Figure  S14  and  S15 ) mirrored the patterns observed in our fluorescence data  (Figure 3c ) and fitted well 

with established kinetic model predictions ( Figure 3b ). 19  Notably, comparing the top‑performing 

enzyme ratios showed that although both the fluorescence‑ and Raman‑based measurements identified 

an optimum consistent with the kinetic model, 19  the Raman‑derived data exhibited closer agreement with 

the model predictions ( Figure 3g ). 

Furthermore, CascadeMAP allowed us to identify the range of enzyme ratios that lead to DCP 

accumulation (Figure  S14c ). While the TCP concentration remained relatively constant due to 

continuous oil feeding ( Figure  S14b ), a slight decrease was observed in the region of high DCP 

accumulation, suggesting a possible slow depletion of the substrate within the droplets.  Conversely, in 

regions where both DhaA and HheC were present at low concentrations  — conditions insufficient to initiate 

degradation —we observed  a corresponding increase in TCP concentration. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

Figure 3 | Optimization of enzyme ratios for TCP degradation pathway. a,  The scheme of TCP degradation 

pathway. The abbreviated compound names denote: TCP  – 1,2,3 -trichloropropane, DCP  – (R,S )-2,3 -

dichloropropane -1-ol, ECH  – (R,S )-epichlorohydrin, CPD  – (R,S )-3-chloropropane -1,2 -diol, GDL  – (R,S )-glycidol, and 

GLY  – glycerol.  b, The prediction of TCP pathway performance depending on enzyme ratios based on a kinetic model 

reported previously. 10  c, Relative fluorescence signal of TCP pathway enzyme ratio optimization for a glycerol 

detection pathway employed for glycerol detection. The measurement was conducted at ~30 min of the reaction 

time, and the mean reaction temperature was 38.2  ± 0.2°C.  d, Relative Raman signal depending on enzyme ratios 

for the product. The experiment was carried out at ~30 min of the reaction time, and the mean reaction temperature 

was ~37°C.  e, The Raman spectrum for the enzyme ratios producing the most GLY with spectra of the neat 

compounds (inset).  f, The overlay of reaction spectrum (black) from  e and the spectrum (beige) reconstructed from 

non -negative least squares (NNLS) calculation of individual compounds.  g, The parallel coordinates plot of 

combined datasets from fluorescence ( c, green lines) and Raman ( d, blue lines) and the top ratio combination from 

the kinetic model ( b, red line). The best conditions from each dataset (i.e., those showing maximum glycerol 

production) are highlighted with bold lines and correspond to white circles in  b-d.

# Bayesian optimization of the glycerol detection pathway 

To fully harness the autonomous nature of CascadeMAP experiments, we incorporated a Bayesian 

optimization (BO) active learning (AL) module that operates in a closed -feedback loop even during 

experimental runs ( Figure  1b  and  S16 ). The user defines the parameter ranges to be optimized and sets 

the “budget”, meaning the number of conditions to be tested in the initial and subsequent rounds 

(Figure  S17 ). Then the BO AL integrated in MAPit proceeds as follows. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

First, the BO algorithm generates the initial set of conditions to be tested, i.e., the flow rates on the 

pump and the desired reaction temperature. We introduced several technical novelties to maximize the 

efficiency of this phase. Rather than using tradi tional random sampling, the initial experimental set is 

created using quasi -random Halton sequences to provide uniform coverage of the multi -dimensional 

parameter space for the given “budget” of conditions. Our algorithm also allows combining several 

param eters into a simplex group, i.e., a set of parameters whose values should sum up to a fixed constant 

for all generated conditions. For example, joining pump flow rates of enzyme solutions in such a group 

enables us to keep the total flow and thus the sum o f enzyme concentrations constant. Once a list of 

conditions is generated, the algorithm optimizes the execution order to minimize system stabilization 

delays.  This is achieved via two criteria: (i) high -latency parameters (typically temperature) are change d

in a single direction to avoid repeated heating and cooling cycles; (ii) for the remaining parameters, the 

Travelling Salesman Problem (with user -defined weights if needed) is solved to ensure the minimal 

overall switching distance between consecutive se ts of conditions. The combination of these two criteria 

helped to minimize the time delays necessary for the microfluidic system to recalibrate after each 

experimental condition was measured. 

Following the initial experimental round, the data generated via the  "step -wise end -point " acquisition 

mode are processed and analyzed by the MAPit software in quasi -real -time ( Figure  S8d, S9  and  S18 ). 

After the data are processed and analyzed, the newly collected measured conditions are fed back into the 

BO algorithm to refine the model of the reaction landscape. Based on this updated knowledge, the BO 

algorithm proposes a next batch of conditions fo r the subsequent round to be tested ( Figure  4). This 

enti re process —measuring, data processing and analysis, learning, and re -planning —proceeds 

iteratively in a closed loop, enabling fully autonomous operation for days at a time without any human 

intervention. 

We validated the AL workflow using the glycerol detection pathway as  a straightforward model 

cascade with relatively short reaction times. We sought to optimize enzyme ratios, pH, and temperature. 

The first challenge was to automate the BO algorithm's learning from the initial set of measured 

conditions. We performed severa l optimizations with a single next round of active learning ( Figure  4b -

c). Our results demonstrate that the BO algorithm successfully identified higher -performing conditions 

in the second  round, consistently outperforming the best results from the initial sampling ( Figure  4c ). 

However, we noted a critical dependency on the experimental "budget": when the number of conditions 

per round was too low relative to the complexity of the experiment (e.g.,  Figure  4b , Experiment 4 with 

20 conditions per round), the overall combinatorial space was undersampled, and the second round 

failed to yield  a substantial enrichment. When we compared the relative performances of the previous 

DoE optimization and  the current single -next round AL dataset, we found the identified optimal 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

temperature and enzyme ratios to be highly consistent ( Figure  4d ). Despite a differently identified pH 

optimum, the AL algorithm could efficiently sample the combinatorial space ( Figure  S19 ) while 

providing optimum using only one third of conditions (225 conditions) compared to the DoE 

optimization (660 conditions,  Figure  2e ), thus representing a massive increase in experimental 

efficiency. 

To evaluate the robustness of the AL workflow over extended durations, we transitioned from single -

round optimization to a multi -round sequence. To maximize experimental efficiency, we fixed the 

reaction temperature and from the initial 50 conditions (to b e tested per round), we switched to 

10  conditions per initial round and 5 conditions per subsequent iteration. During these extended runs, 

we compared  two different batch -sequential strategies. In addition to the formerly used Exploration and 

Exploitation  (EE) algorithm 29  balancing exploration and exploitation, we further introduced the Kriging 

Believer (KB) algorithm 30  to guide the optimization more towards exploitation. For each of these 

algorithms, we obtained a representative dataset of 48 rounds of AL ( Figure  4e ) autonomously 

measuring 245 conditions per experiment. 

Due to minor mechanical misalignments between the temperature -controlled incubator and the 

optical detection system, the raw datasets were not directly comparable across different runs. However, 

because the initial 10 -condition sequences were identical for  every experiment, we were able to use these 

points as an internal reference ( Figure  S20 ). By applying linear regressions to project the KB dataset 

onto the EE one we observed that both strategies identified similar optima. The primary divergence 

appeared  in the pH buffer ratios, where the KB algorithm slightly outperformed the EE approach 

(Figure  4e -f). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

Figure 4  | Active learning optimization of the glycerol detection pathway.  a, Workflow of AL 

involving (i ) scheduling the conditions to test in each round based on the limits for each parameter to be 

tested, (ii) measurement of data involving end -point detection, (iii) processing and evaluation of data, 

and (iv) learning of patterns in data and updating the m odel to predict new conditions (white crosses). 

b-c, AL optimization of temperature, pH, and enzyme ratios.  b, Example of data acquired during the initial 

and next round.  c, Box plot summarizing four experiments composed of two rounds of AL. The 

performanc e on the Y axis denotes a signal relative to the maximum signal obtained during the first round 

of a particular experiment, as indicated also by the gray dashed line. Experiments 1 -3 included 50 initial 

conditions to be measured, while experiment 4 had 20  initial conditions measured. For experiment 2, 

only 3 of the next conditions were measured.  a-c, Rounds 1 (R1) and 2 (R2) stand for the initial and the 

subsequent rounds of AL and are marked by grey and yellow, respectively.  d, Parallel coordinates plot 

co mparing the 10 highest -signal conditions from DoE (red,  Figure 2e ) and AL (gold,  c) when optimizing 

enzyme ratios, temperature and pH (ratio of Tricine and Bis -tris propane (BTP)). The best conditions 

from each algorithm are connected by a bold line.  e-f, AL optimization of pH and enzyme ratios using two 

AL algorithms, Exploration and Exploitation (EE, blue) and Kriging Believer (KB, green). The data from 

the KB dataset were linearly projected onto the EE dataset ( Figure S 20 ).  e, The maximum observed signal 

during the AL throughout 48 rounds of active learning.  f, Parallel coordinates plot of the 10 highest -signal 

conditions from each algorithm. The best conditions from each algorithm are connected by a bold line. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

# Experimental design and data analysis using multi -agent AI system 

The concept of autonomous self -driving laboratories aligns with the emerging paradigm of multi -

agent AI systems. These systems operate as coordinated teams of virtual agents that manage and 

optimize complex scientific workflows, enabling autonomous experim entation, data analysis, decision -

making, and iterative hypothesis generation .5,31  In this work, we explored the capabilities and limitations 

of the multi -agent AI systems  in two scenarios: (i) the design and (ii) the analysis of CascadeMAP 

experiments  (Figure  5a -c) by employing the Theorema Discovery and Theorema  Lab multi -agent AI 

workflows, respectively. 

Initially, we tasked the Theorema Discovery multi -agent system with designing an enzyme cascade for 

on -chip glycerol detection without access to prior experimental data  (see  Task 1.1  in  Supplemental 

Design of CascadeMAP experiments ). In the first round, the system proposed several plausible assay 

architectures, including NADH -based glycerol dehydrogenase pathways and glycerol kinase/glycerol -3-

phosphate dehydrogenase routes. However,  the most directly actionable oxidase –peroxidase solutions 

converged predom inantly  on Amplex Red and AUR -type reporters. 26  To test the system's adaptive 

reasoning, the agents were subsequently contextualized with an explicit experimental failure mode: 

irreproducible fluorescence and compromised droplet stability induced by AUR aggregation  (Figure  S6 

and  prompt  Example 3  in Supplemental Design of CascadeMAP experiments ).26  In response, the 

agents proposed three classes of solution: (i) replacement of reporters by  2,2' -azino -bis(3 -

ethylbenzothiazoline -6-sulfonic acid (ABTS), homovanillic acid, and boronate -caged hydrogen peroxide 

probes; (ii) assay simplification via NADH -based glycerol dehydrogenase detection, which eliminates 

dependence on oxygen, hydrogen peroxid e, and HRP; and (iii) formulation and platform interventions, 

such as bovine serum albumin (BSA) addition, pluronic co -surfactants, and wetted -surface conditioning 

where compatible with the microfluidic platform. 

Next, we tasked the Theorema Discovery multi -agent system to suggest a specific experimental design 

for our system including schedules and settings for Bayesian optimization (see  Task 1.2  in 

Supplemental Design of CascadeMAP experiments ). While most of the answers were in agreement 

with our current strategy, the agents could have been more specific in the specifications of buffers to 

adjust the pH and proposed relatively few temperatures to be tested. On the other hand, it proposed a 

num ber of control exper iments/conditions and suggested interesting approaches to tune the DoE 

experiments, e.g. by suggesting the D -optimal or I -optimal designs. Altogether, the answers for both tasks 

compiled by the Theorema Discovery agents, are provided in the  Supplemental Design of CascadeMAP 

experiments .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

Figure 5  | The planning and analysis of data by multi -agent AI system. a,  The augmentation of a 

CascadeMAP workflow (beige) by interactions with multi -agent AI system (purple). Multi -agent AI 

platforms Theorema Discovery and Theorema Lab were integrated with experimental design and data 

analysis, respectively.  b, The skills of Theorema multi -agent AI system.  c, Overview of two case studies 

(prompts on right side) given as tasks for the multi -agent AI system. The purple rectangles highlight some 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

of the outputs from a particular AI agent. The abbreviated reaction components include: glycerol (GLY), 

glycerol kinase (GK), glycerol -3-phosphate (G3P), glycerolphosphate oxidase (GPO), hydrogen peroxide 

(H 2O2), horseradish peroxidase (HRP), dihzdroxzacetonephosphate (DHAP), 2,2' -azino -bis(3 -

ethylbenzothiazoline -6-sulfonic acid (ABTS), nikotineamideadenine dinucleotide (NAD +/NADH), 

principal component analysis (PCA).  d-g, Selected outputs for the second case study about analysis and 

interpretation of a who le active learning (AL) campaign comprising 23 experiments, 3,163 conditions 

and overall about 11 GB of data. The graphs focus on two particular experiments, employing the 

Exploration & Exploitation algorithm (blue) and Kriging Believer (green).  d, The progress of exploration 

(solid line) and exploitation (dashed line) for both algorithms.  e, The score plot of principal component 

analysis of all measured data (grey points), highlighting the representative measurements of the two 

algorithms (blue and green p oints).  f-g SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) analysis 32  assessing the 

influence of each parameter (enzymes and pH buffer percentage) on the resulting signal in thousands of 

relative fluorescence units (kRFU) of the Exploration & Exploitation ( f) and Kriging Believer ( g) dataset. 

Each point represents an experimental condition, positioned by SHAP value (impact on signal), while colour 

intensity reflects the corresponding feature value.  Color codes for two optimisation strategies (blue: 

Exploration –Exploitation; green: Kriging Believer) across all panels, while line styles, markers, and colour 

gradients represent panel -specific quantities. 

To evaluate automated data interpretation, the Theorema Lab multi -agent platform was deployed to 

audit 23 experimental BO campaigns, comprising 3,163 recorded conditions and approximately 11.1  GB 

of raw data. At this scale a manual analysis is time -consuming and prone to errors. The agent's outputs 

were benchmarked against a prior, human -curated data quality assessment in which specific dataset 

integrity issues had been identified. The agents sc reened 6,116 raw LabView Technical Data Management 

Streaming (T DMS) files, executing automated parsing, peak detection, experimental logic reconstruction, 

and signal processing validation ( see  Tasks 2.1 and 2.2  of  Supplemental Analysis of CascadeMAP 

experiments ). The multi -agent framework successfully classified the campaigns into three distinct data -

integrity tiers:  4 high quality datasets, 14 partially recoverable or context -dependent campaigns, and 5 

low -quality or incomplete campaigns. Notably, the agents flawlessly identified the two most successful 

optimization t rajectories ( Figure  4e  and  5d -g).  Furthermore, we tasked the agents to provide an 

assessment of progress curves for both exploration and exploitation throughout the experiments 

(Figure  5d ) and a principal component analysis for unsupervised dimensionality reduction ( Figure  5e ). 

The results highlighted that Exploration & Exploitation algorithm overall prioritized global parameter 

space exploration, whereas the Kriging Believer algorithm preferred exploitation. 

The collected dataset was highly heterogeneous as only a fraction of the campaign could be treated as 

directly interpretable, while the remaining regions required manual curation because of low signal -to -

noise ratios, ambiguous row -to -condition alignment,  or incomplete data recovery. At the design -space 

level, Theorema Lab concluded that the BO campaign did not uniformly sample the full reagent space, but 

instead iteratively exploited several related high -response neighborhoods. Furthermore,  we tasked the 

agents to perform  the SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) analysis 32  to  assess the importance of 

individual reaction components  (see  Description of machine -learning methods  in  Supplemental 

Analysis of CascadeMAP experiments ). This feature attribution model revealed that higher GPO levels 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

and intermediate HRP concentrations improved the target response, while BTP, Tricine, and GK played 

minor or highly localized roles ( Figure  5f , g), consistent with a coupled multi -enzyme system where 

overall metabolic flux is limited by the rate -limiting enzymatic step. Crucially, shifts in buffer composition 

alter the balance between enzymes with different pH optima, producing a non -linear respons e landscape 

characterized by multiple local optima. This underlying biochemistry explains why these specific 

va riables manifest as local modulators in SHAP rather than dominant global drivers. The multi -agent AI 

system autonomously transformed a large experimental campaign of raw data into a structured analysis, 

correctly  recognizing  GPO as the dominant factor and successfully cross -validating expert implemented 

data analysis. 

Together, these results demonstrate that multi -agent AI systems can significantly augment both the 

planning and analysis stages of automated experimentation. Ongoing developments are focusing on 

expanding this framework to support on -the -fly learning exper iment execution. However, a paramount 

emphasis remains on integrating rigorous human -in -the -loop control, operational guardrails, and strict 

safety protocols to govern autonomously operating physical systems. 5

# Discussion 

The multiple -parameter optimization of enzyme cascades provides clear benefits from industrial 

bioprocessing aimed at maximizing product yields to metabolic engineering focused on deciphering the 

intricate flux of synthetic networks. In this work, we intro duced CascadeMAP as a platform that efficiently 

combines the high -throughput capabilities of droplet microfluidics with machine learning for exploring 

patterns in complex data, enabling accelerated data -driven optimization. By integrating automated 

hardwar e control with real -time data analysis, CascadeMAP facilitates both traditional DoE and fully 

autonomous active learning workflows. This architecture allows for the execution of hundreds of 

consecutive, closed -loop experiments without human intervention. 

The number of parameters to be simultaneously optimized on CascadeMAP is primarily determined 

by the number of inlet ports on the fluidic manifold. Commercially available manifolds offer up to 16 

inlets, which theoretically enable up to 15 factors to be va ried (accounting for oil required for droplet 

generation). Expansion beyond this limit requires custom manifolds or lab -on -a-chip devices, which 

could further facilitate high -resolution, time -resolved detection as previously described. 33,34  Apart from 

the factors influencing the reaction mixture, external parameters, such as temperature or reaction time, 

must be precisely regulated. CascadeMAP successfully integrates these variables into a fully automated 

closed -loop optimizations workflow.  Our demonstration of the simultaneous optimization of enzyme 

stoichiometry, reaction temperature, and pH represents, to our knowledge, an unprecedented level of 

automation within a microfluidic -based self -driving laboratory platform. Further versatility an d control 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

over sample quality can be achieved by integrating pressure -driven pumps 35  and customized 

temperature control of samples to be introduced to CascadeMAP. 

During CascadeMAP development, we found that selecting a suitable analytical assay is critical. While 

amplex ultra red 26  works well in microtiter plate assays, its instability during the multi -hour storage 

required in syringes makes it incompatible with long -term autonomous runs. Conversely, while 

aminophenyl fluorescein (APF) 27,28  offers excellent stability, its specificity for hydrogen peroxide limits 

its utility in monitoring complex intermediate dynamics.  To overcome these limitations, we introduced 

high -power label -free Raman detection, enabling concurrent monitoring of substrates, intermediates, 

and products, exemplified by TCP degradation to glycerol. Such sensitivity exceeds conventional Raman 

systems and avoids the non -linear signal enhancements and complex nanoparticle substrate 

requirements of Surface -Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS), which complicate quantitative 

interpretation. 36  Future versions of CascadeMAP  may integrate absorbance, luminescence, or mass 

spectrometric detection for even greater versatility. 

Recent advances in autonomous experimentation highlight how combining AI with robotic systems 

can significantly speed up biochemical research. 15,37,38  CascadeMAP uses microfluidics to achieve similar 

or higher throughput while using less reagents, precise timing and real -time adjustments. 6 One of the 

exciting developments is the use of multi -agent AI systems. 5 Instead of relying on a single model, these 

systems embed the scientific workflow into specialized, collaborative agents. 31,39 –43  The integration of 

multi -agent AI into the CascadeMAP workflow  (Figure  5a)  demonstrated both the promise and 

limitations of these systems. In the design task, the agent's initial convergence highlights a tendency to 

reproduce literature -prevalent approaches when operating in the absence of experimental context. 

However, when prov ided with real failure data, the system generated mechanistically grounded and 

practically actionable alternatives. In the analysis task, autonomous processing of over 11 GB of raw data, 

including signal validation, campaign quality stratifica tion, and SHAP -based feature attribution, closely 

matched expert -derived conclusions. The agreement between agent -identified and manually verified 

outcomes confirms that multi -agent systems can reliably be used for data analysis at scales that are 

impracti cal for manual review. Future iterations of the CascadeMAP framework will leverage multi -agent 

AI to drive  active learning experiments. By dynamically adjusting the balance between exploration and 

exploitation the system will execute real -time, multi -objec tive optimization across coupled parameters, 

including yield, selectivity, and long -term operational stability, i.e., areas where agent -based Bayesian 

strategies have already shown effectiveness. 44,45 

In summary, CascadeMAP represents a robust platform for optimizing complex enzyme cascades 

within a single, unattended experimental campaign. Thanks to a high degree of fluidic automation, as well 

as integration with machine learning and multi -agent system s, tens to hundreds of consecutive learning 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

cycles can be carried out without any human intervention. By autonomously conducting experiments, 

CascadeMAP will contribute to the generation of high -quality datasets, requested by current ML 

pipelines, 46  and will become a valuable tool for metabolic engineers to optimize complex pathways 

leading to value -added compounds. 47 

# Methods 

# CascadeMAP experiments with fluorescence detection 

Hardware 

The CascadeMAP hardware is based on the previously introduced and thoroughly described 

KinMAP. 13  Briefly, the oil and aqueous phases are loaded to GASTIGHT syringes (Hamilton, USA) and then 

operated by the low -pressure neMesys microfluidic pumps (Cetoni, Germany) in the positive pressure 

mode. All liquids travel through high -purity perfluoralkoxy (PF A) tubing 1622L (OD 1/16 inch, ID 0.02 

inch, IDEX Health & Science, USA) and the droplets are generated either on 6 -inlet manifold P -170 (IDEX 

Health & Science,  USA), or on a 10 -inlet manifold Z10M1PK (Vici Valco, France). For the long -term 

experiment, the aqueous solutions were refilled during the experiment automatically by using  3/2 -way 

valves (Cetoni, Germany) and the oil was delivered via two 60ml -Omnifix (Braun, Germany) syringes 

both mounted on a Fusion 200 pump (Chemyx, USA). The flow of oil from these two syringes was then 

unified via the Y -junction P -512 (IDEX Health & Scie nce, USA). The ratios of solutions and velocity of 

droplet movement were controlle d by changing the flow rates of the individual pumps, keeping the 

constant flow rates of 12 and 12 μL/min for the aqueous and oil phases, respectively. The droplets with 

the reaction mixture subsequently traveled through the tubing coiled around a copper -heating rod 

(diameter = 1.5 cm, length 8 cm (manufactured by PB Control, Czech Republic), which allows moving 

along the longer axis using travel stage (LTS150, Thorlabs, Germany) and heating from ambient 

temperature up to 180 °C. The copper rod is heated by  a cartridge (6.5x40 mm, 100 W, Farnell, 

Switzerland) embedded inside the rod. The temperature is monitored using a thermocouple (Sensor, 

Thermoelement Type K  - 0.5 mm, Farnell, Switzerland), inserted into the copper block close to the 

surface. Temperature  control is realized using a PID controller (CN7800, Omega, USA), with an observed 

temperature variation from the set point of 0.1 °C. Fluorescence assays were performed using the 

following optical components, all purchased from Thorlabs (Germany) if it’s  not stated otherwise. For 

APF assays, excitation was provided by an LED M470L3 diode (470 nm), in combination with a 

DMLP505R dichroic mirror and an excitation filter XVS0470 Shortpass Filter VIS 470nm 25mm dia. 

(Asahi spectra, USA). Emission was collected  at 512 –518 nm range, with the LED operated at 90% 

intensity. For AUR assays, excitation was achieved using an LED M530L3 diode (530 nm), together with 

a DMLP567R dichroic mirror and a 590 nm long‑pass filter (Comar 590 GY25, UK). Emission was 

collected in  the 588 –594 nm range at an LED intensity of 30%. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

MAP it software 

The MAPit software was written in LabVIEW and is based on a queued message handler, which 

facilitates multiple sections of code running in parallel and enables control of MAP hardware 

components. The main code was extended by Python -based scripts for accel erated peak detection and 

evaluation of a sequence of measurements. 

Bayesian optimization scripts 

Additionally, a Bayesian optimization feedback loop was integrated into MAPit, providing online 

replanning of experiments based on the data obtained in the previous round. The BO module was written 

in Python and is available on GitHub:  https://github.com/loschmidt/CascadeMAP –Bayesian .

Briefly, the Halton series for generating the initial and subsequent sets of parameters for the limits 

provided by the user was implemented using scipy.stats.qmc.halton class of the SciPy library v1.17.0. The 

transformation of the sample for each simplex g roup was implemented according to the “Transformation 

root” method. 48  The generated conditions were sorted as follows: first, if one parameter was selected as 

“priority”, the list was sorted according to this parameter; second, for each value of this parameter (or 

the entire list if no parameter is selected as priority) the  weighted Travelling Salesman Problem was 

solved using the solve_tsp_simulated_annealing function of the python -tsp library. 

The BO was based on the Gaussian Process Regression implemented using the scikit -learn library 

v1.8.0. By default, the expected improvement acquisition was used. Two different algorithms were 

implemented to account for batches at each iteration: Exploratio n-Exploitation sampling different 

weights in the Weighted Expected Improvement function 29  and Kriging Believer. 30  In addition to the 

default definitions, each one of those methods could be biased towards more exploration or more 

exploitation according to a separate setting available to the user. Moreover, if a selected method 

suggested the same conditions within one  batch (which tends to happen once the method started to 

converge in the toy examples), our pipeline iteratively attempted to bias the current iteration to 

encourage more exploration for a fixed number of attempts (10 by default), after which any remaining 

duplicities were replaced with a random subset. 

Experimental modes 

Generally, there are three modes for running experiments provided by the MAPit: (i) sequence mode, 

(ii) flow profile mode, and (iii) manual operation mode. For the first sequence mode, the user defines the 

pump flow rates to be measured in a sequence with  an identical length of droplet generation. 

Additionally, the user selects the reaction temperatures to be measured from the smallest to the largest. 

The sequence mode enables time -resolved data collection in 12 loops on the rod, while a single loop 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

(typically loop 12 with the longest reaction time) can be selected for end -point detection. Each data point 

typically consisted of at least 20 repetitions (droplets). 

Second, the flow profile offers an additional level of freedom by varying the length of generation for 

each combination of flow rates. Practically, the flow profile mode is used exclusively with the end -point 

detection mode, which is measured for the entir e reaction sequence and unlike sequence mode, does not 

separate data based on the currently generated flow rate combination. Finally, the manual operation 

mode lacks the automation features of the previous two modes, yet enables quick acquisition of desire d

data. 

Data acquisition modes 

The data acquisition was initially performed the same way as on KinMAP. To account for dispersion, 

a so -called “safe time -resolved” data acquisition mode was used. It works as follows: the reaction zone is 

first filled with the droplets corresponding to th e desired combination of flow rates, and only afterwards, 

a signal is detected in the loops of choice in a backward direction to retrieve time -resolved fluorescence 

data. The suppressed dispersion of liquid phases mixing enabled the “step -wise end -point” d ata 

acquisition mode. This means that at each time (typically 1 min), a reaction condition is generated, and 

the same time is used for data acquisition. In the end, the data need to be realigned so that the particular 

signal matches the correct reaction co ndition. For this reason, at the end of each condition sequence for 

a particular temperature, so -called “auxiliary  rows” need to be introduced to account for the conditions 

generated at the end of the sequence. 

Glycerol pathway experiments 

The glycerol pathway optimization experiments were usually run with the following samples in the 

syringes. Individual enzymes were in separate syringes at such a concentration that the final reaction 

concentration of all enzymes would sum to 1 U/mL. The gl ycerol, APF, and ATP were typically mixed in 

one syringe, so that the final reaction mixture would contain 250 μM glycerol, 25 μM APF, and 2 mM ATP. 

Specific experiments required that all of these concentrations be adjusted accordingly. 

TCP pathway experiments 

For the TCP pathway, substrate delivery was achieved through a substrate partitioning between the 

oil (continuous phase)  and aqueous (dispersed) phase as described previously. 23,49  The enzymes were 

loaded either mixed or separately in syringes with the final reaction mixture concentration of 0.6 mg/mL. 

The molecular weights of monomers of these enzymes (equal to their active sites) were roughly similar, 

so the ratios were calculated  with this assumption. The reaction time was set to about 30 minutes. The 

solution of ~ 9.4mM TCP in fluorinated oil FC -40 (3M, USA) with 0.25 % AZ2C surfactant (manufactured 

by CF Plus Chemicals, Czech Republic according to a previously published method 50 ) was diluted at least 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

one day ahead of the experiment by injecting TCP to the oil/surfactant mixture in a glass vial, with as 

little air as possible, quickly tightening and then rolling overnight on a tube roller. 

For Raman analyses the concentration of TCP in oil/surfactant mixture was ~ 47mM. Saturation with 

the substrate in the reaction mixture was required for Raman to reach limits of detection of the produced 

GLY. TCP was diluted in the oil/surfactant mixture i n a glass vial with limited air volume by vortexing at 

12,000 rpm for 120 s. 

Off -line pH calibration 

The dependence of pH on the buffer composition (more specifically, the Tricine percentage in the 

buffering system mixture) was measured in 100 μL aliquots for the glycerol detection pathway. These 

samples were divided to contain 4 different enzyme ratios,  roughly capturing the extremes and middle 

of the enzyme ratio ternary plot. The pH measurements were done first for samples without glycerol 

(Penta, Czech Republic), ATP (Merck, USA), and APF (Merck or Thermo Fisher, USA), and subsequently 

after their addi tion (thus initiating the cascade reaction). The addition of these reaction components 

generally resulted in a decrease in pH, whereas the pH remained relatively constant during the reaction. 

Such calibration was repeated for the temperatures: 25, 30, 35,  37, and 40 °C, corresponding to the 

experiments on CascadeMAP. 

# Microtiter plate reader experiments 

The microtiter plate measurements were performed on the CLARIOstar plus reader (BMG Labtech, 

Germany) using BRAND F 96  well plates (BRAND, Germany) with 100μL reaction volume. For 

measurements with AUR (Thermo Fisher, USA), the excitation and emission were set to 530 -20 and 585 -

10 nm, respectively, while for measurements with APF, the excitation and emission were set to 48 5-10 

and 525.5 -19 nm, respectively. 

# Preparation of enzyme samples 

Glycerol detection pathway enzymes 

Glycerol kinase from  Cellulomonas  sp. (G6142), Glycerol 3 -phosphate oxidase from  Pediococcus  sp. 

(G9637), and Horseradish peroxidase (SRE0082) were purchased from Merck, USA. Upon dissolution, 

the enzyme concentrations were adjusted to 40  – 100 U/mL (units were used as defined by the 

manufacturer) and then flash -frozen in liquid nitrogen and stor ed at  -70  °C for further use. For 

CascadeMAP measurements, the enzymes were transferred to 50 mM Tris -SO 4 buffer (50 mM Tris -SO 4,

5mM  MgSO 4 pH 8.0). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

TCP degradation pathway enzymes 

Genes encoding DhaA31 and EchA wt  were cloned into the pET21b and pET28b plasmid, respectively, 

in frame with a C -terminal His -tag, while the gene for HheC wt was cloned into the pET21b plasmid 

without any tag. The plasmids were transformed into  E. coli  BL21 (DE3) cells, and the proteins were 

expressed there. DhaA31 and EchA were purified from cell lysates by immobilized metallo -affinity 

chromatography using a HisTrap HP column (Cytiva, USA) charged with Ni 2+  ions. HheC wt was purified 

using anion -exchange chromatography: 51  the crude extract was applied to a 20 ml Hi Load 16/10 

(GE  Healthcare, USA) packed with Q Sepharose High performance. The buffer system consisted of TEM 

buffer A (50 mM Tris -SO 4, 1 mM EDTA, 1mM DTT, pH  7.5) and TEM buffer B (50  mM Tris -SO 4,

1 mM  EDTA, 1  mM 1mM DTT, 0.45 M (NH 4)2SO 4, pH 7.5). HheC was eluted with a two -step increasing 

linear gradient: 0 to 45 % buffer B in 15 column volumes (CVs) and 45 to 100 % buffer B in 3 CVs. For 

part of the fractions, the pure tetrameric fraction of HheC was isolated by subsequent size exclusio n

chromatography using HiLoad 16 /600 SuperdexTM 200 column (Cytiva, USA). 

Samples of DhaA31 and EchA wt in the 50mM PB buffer (41mM K 2HPO 4 and 9mM KH 2PO 4, pH  7.5) 

were lyophilized for long -term storage. The HheC wt samples, both after anion exchange and after size -

exclusion chromatography (in TEM B buffer or 50mM Tris SO 4, respectively), were flash -frozen in liquid 

nitrogen and stored at  -70  °C for further use. For CascadeMAP measurements with fluorescence 

detection, the enzymes were transferred to 50mM Tris -SO 4 buffer, while for measurements with Raman 

detection, the reaction bu ffer was 50mM PB buffer. 

# Raman detection mode 

Hardware  - Raman setup 

An in -house -built Raman microspectrometer was developed at the Czech Academy of Science (ISI 

CAS). The high -power Verdi -V6 (Coherent, USA) laser was employed to provide up to 6  W in continuous 

mode at a wavelength of 532 nm. The laser was passed through multiple optic al components, such as 

mirrors and lenses (Thorlabs, USA), a 532 nm BrightLine dichroic beamsplitter (Semrock, USA), and an 

in‑house -built anti -reflective at 540 –700 nm two -way mirror for the imaging camera Watec WAT -902H 

(Watec Cameras, USA).  To reach the sample volume, the laser was focused through an Olympus PLN 20x 

objective (NA 0.4) (Olympus, Japan). For proper focusing, the frame with the sample holder was mounted 

onto an LX30/M 25 mm XYZ Translation Stage (Thorlabs, USA). The scattered li ght was collected through 

the same objective and passed to a 532 nm StopLine single -notch filter (Semrock, USA) to pass the 

Raman -shifted light. An Acton SP -2556 spectrometer (Teledyne Princeton Instruments, USA) featuring a 

1200 gr/mm diffraction grating,  and an Andor Newton DU920P Bx -DD CCD camera (Oxford Instruments 

Andor, UK) were applied to separate individual wavelengths and detect their intensity ( Figure  S12a ). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

Hardware  - microfluidics 

Microfluidic setup was kept as similar as possible to the design used for the fluorescence assay, 

although some changes were necessary. Due to the high -power laser, it was not possible to analyze 

through the PFA tubing (ID 0.5 mm, OD 1.6 mm); therefore, a  glass capillary (ID 0.5 mm, OD 0.7 mm) 

(both tubing and capillary from CM Scientific Ryefield, Republic of Ireland) was integrated. The capillary 

was held in a custom -made 3D printed holder with the same footprint as a microscope slide (26 × 76 mm) 

to make  it universal for other standard Raman instruments. The holder was fixed to an  aluminum  frame 

(Figure  S12b ). The transition from tubing to capillary was achieved by utilizing a small piece of tubing 

with a larger ID (0.75 mm) that was put over the capillary as a “sleeve”. The capillary with the sleeve was 

then fitted into the union connector JR -1066 (BGB Analy tik Vertrieb, Germany), which was connected to 

the tubing at the other end ( Figure  S12c ). This provided uniform ID throughout the system, preventing 

the droplets from tearing. However, the addition of a capillary seemed to alter the behavior of the 

microfluidic setup, as the 6 -inlet manifold P -170 (IDEX Health & Science, USA) was not efficient in forming 

cohesive droplets, so it was used only for precis e enzyme mixing, and Y -junction P -512 (IDEX Health & 

Science, USA) was inserted to inject the oil into the system to create stable droplets. The total flow rate 

in the system was 600 μl/h. The total time of the reaction mixture (from the droplet -generating  point to 

the detection zone) in the system was 40 min, although only 30 min was in the heated bath TVL 004 

(INGOS, Czech republic) set to 37  °C to propagate the reaction. The pumps with the syringes containing 

reaction solutions were kept in Biosan Orbital Shaker -Incubator ES -20/80 (Biosan, Latvia) at 12 °C to 

stabilize the enzymes. 

Data acquisition, processing, and analysis 

Custom -made acquisition software based on LabVIEW (National Instruments, USA) was written for 

the Andor Newton DU920P Bx -DD CCD camera to automatically detect the presence of the aqueous phase 

in the stream of droplets and initiate Raman spectra collection  (Video S1 ). For data processing and 

analysis, other custom -made Python scripts  were used  – available on GitHub :

https://github.com/pavlinasik/RAMSPECT .

To minimize unnecessary data storage, spectra were collected automatically only when the water 

peak intensity reached a selected threshold, which was chosen experimentally using a  continuous flow 

of the aqueous phase (no droplets). The acquisition time was 0.1  s with 2 accumulations. This resulted in 

approximately 1 -2 spectra collected per single droplet once they were introduced. The spectra were 

collected for a total of 10 minutes  per enzyme ratio. From previous experiments it occurred that 

2 minutes were  required for the system to settle when the ratios changed. Thus, these spectra were 

omitted for the further processing. That resulted in approximately 750 spectra per enzyme ratio. Since 

the dehalogenation analysis was carried out three times and the data  were averaged, the total acquisition 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

time per enzyme ratio was about 7.5 minutes. The laser output power was set to 6 W, leading to a 

measuring power (the light actually coming out of the objective and into the sample) to be approximately 

4.5 W. The workflow of data processing consisted of th e following steps: smoothing by Savitzky -Golay 

algorithm (polynomial order of 1, width 7 pixels), cropping the spectra (2700 -3100 cm -1, area with all 

peaks of CH vibrations of the analyzed metabolites), min -max normalization of all spectra, grouping the 

sp ectra by the applied enzyme ratios, averaging within the group, and subtracting processed averaged 

blank signal (blank measurements were processed in the same way, the reaction mixture did not contain 

substrate). Then, polynomial background removal with fi xed anchor points (polynomial order of 4, 

anchor points outside of the CH -peak area  - separated by 10  cm -1 from 2700 to 2800 cm -1 and from 3050 

to 3100 cm -1) was applied to decrease the residual background signal. Non -negative least squares 

approach (NNLS) 52  was employed to decompose the resulting spectra of the reactions  and establish the 

contribution of TCP, DCP, and GLY Raman signals. 

# Mutli -agent AI system 

Two multi -agent AI systems developed by Theorema were used in this work: Theorema Discovery for 

experimental design ( Figure  5b ,c) and Theorema Lab for data analysis ( Figure  5d –g). Each system 

coordinates parallel instances of speciali zed research agents grounded in the published literature, public 

databases and tools. Moreover, Theorema Lab works also with user -supplied experimental datasets. 

For the design task, Theorema Discovery was given the cascade design problem. Synthesis of 

Theorema runs and representative prompt examples (including the failure -mode context introduced 

after the initial run) are provided in the  Supplementary Design of CascadeMAP experiments .

For the analysis task, Theorema Lab autonomously processed the 23 -campaign dataset 

(3,163  recorded conditions, ≈11.1 GB of raw LabVIEW TDMS files) and produced the campaign -quality 

classification, principal -component analysis, and SHAP feature attributions  (see  Description of 

machine -learning methods  in  Supplemental Analysis of CascadeMAP experiments ). Details are 

provided in  Supplementary Analysis of CascadeMAP experiments .

# Code availability 

Custom analysis code developed by the authors for this study is openly available: the RAMSPECT 

Raman spectral processing pipeline at https://github.com/pavlinasik/RAMSPECT, and the MAPit 

Bayesian -optimization  module at  https://github.com/loschmidt/CascadeMAP -Bayesian .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

Theorema Discovery and Theorema Lab are proprietary multi -agent AI systems developed by 

Theorema and are not released as open source. Theorema Lab is currently in private beta. Access for 

academic peer review and methodological verification can be requeste d at  https://theorema.ai/lab -

access . Editors and referees of this manuscript were granted access on request during peer review. The 

prompts and configurations used in this work are provided in the sections  Supplementary Design of 

CascadeMAP experiments  and  Supplementary Analysis of CascadeMAP experiments .

# Acknowledgments 

The authors would like to acknowledge funding from the Czech Ministry of Education (grants CLARA 

CZ.02.01.01/00/23_029/0008437, INBIO CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16_026/0008451, TEAMING 

CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/17_043/0009632, ESFRI RECETOX LM2018121, ESFRI ELIXIR LM2018 131, 

EXCELES Oncology LX22NPO5102). The authors also acknowledge financial support from the Swiss 

National Science Foundation (grant no. 205321_176011) and ETH Zurich. The authors acknowledge 

financial support from the Czech Science Foundation (project no.  25 -15784L). This project has received 

funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and Innovation program (TEAMING 857560 

and Sinfonia 814418). The article reflects the author's view, and the Agency is not responsible for any 

use that may be ma de of the information it contains. Michal Vasina acknowledges the financial support 

of his doctoral study by the scholarship Brno Ph.D. Talent. Electron microscopy and Raman spectroscopy 

analysis provided at Core Facility Electron microscopy and Raman spec troscopy, ISI CAS, Brno, CZE, is 

supported by MEYS CR (LM2023050 Czech -BioImaging). 

# Competing interests 

Michael Jirasek, Filip Dousek and Hynek Walner  are employees of Theorema Inc., which develops and 

commercializes the multi -agent AI platform used in this study. The remaining authors declare no 

competing interests. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

# ORCID 

Michal Vasina: 0000 -0002 -1504 -9929 

David Kovar: 0000 -0002 -5550 -6143 

Martin Kizovsky: 0009 -0002 -2906 -8802 

David Lacko: 0009 -0007 -0332 -9193 

Pavel Vanacek: 0000 -0002 -9046 -2983 

Pavlina Sikorova: 0009 -0004 -8908 -0701 

Michael Jirasek: 0000 -0002 -4630 -6457 

Pavel Solansky: 0000 -0002 -1608 -8655 

Jan Jezek: 0000 -0002 -5753 -1676 

Ota Samek: 0000 -0001 -8188 -7608 

Pavel Zemanek: 0000 -0003 -2831 -8347 

Andrew DeMello: 0000 -0003 -1943 -1356 

Zdenek Pilat: 0000 -0001 -9259 -8393 

Jiri Damborsky: 0000 -0002 -7848 -8216 

Stavros Stavrakis: 0000 -0002 -0888 -5953 

Stanislav Mazurenko: 0000 -0003 -3659 -4819 

Zbynek Prokop: 0000 -0001 -9358 -4081 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

# References 

1.  Benítez -Mateos, A. I., Roura Padrosa, D. & Paradisi, F. Multistep enzyme cascades as a route towards 

green and sustainable pharmaceutical syntheses.  Nat. Chem.  14 , 489 –499 (2022). 

2.  Teshima, M., Willers, V. P. & Sieber, V. Cell -free enzyme cascades  — application and transition from 

development to industrial implementation.  Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.  79 , 102868 (2023). 

3.  Rasor, B. J.  et al.  Toward sustainable, cell -free biomanufacturing.  Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.  69 , 136 –144 

(2021). 

4.  Naseri, G. & Koffas, M. A. G. Application of combinatorial optimization strategies in synthetic biology. 

Nat. Commun.  11 , 2446 (2020). 

5.  Damborsky, J., Mazurenko, S., Yang, Z. J. & Bednar, D. A Room Full of Experts, None of Them Human: 

Multi -Agent AI as Virtual Research Teams.  ChemRxiv  2026 ,. 

6.  Vasina, M.  et al.  In -depth analysis of biocatalysts by microfluidics: An emerging source of data for 

machine learning.  Biotechnol. Adv.  66 , 108171 (2023). 

7.  Rabe, K. S., Müller, J., Skoupi, M. & Niemeyer, C. M. Cascades in Compartments: En Route to Machine -

Assisted Biotechnology.  Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.  56 , 13574 –13589 (2017). 

8.  Siedentop, R., Claaßen, C., Rother, D., Lütz, S. & Rosenthal, K. Getting the Most Out of Enzyme 

Cascades: Strategies to Optimize In Vitro Multi -Enzymatic Reactions.  Catalysts  11 , 1183 (2021). 

9.  Pandi, A.  et al.  A versatile active learning workflow for optimization of genetic and metabolic 

networks.  Nat. Commun.  13 , 3876 (2022). 

10.  HamediRad, M.  et al.  Towards a fully automated algorithm driven platform for biosystems design. 

Nat. Commun.  10 , 5150 (2019). 

11.  Baltussen, M. G., van de Wiel, J., Fernández Regueiro, C. L., Jakštaitė, M. & Huck, W. T. S. A Bayesian 

Approach to Extracting Kinetic Information from Artificial Enzymatic Networks.  Anal. Chem.  94 ,

7311 –7318 (2022). 

12.  Teders, M., Pogodaev, A. A., Bojanov, G. & Huck, W. T. S. Reversible Photoswitchable Inhibitors 

Generate Ultrasensitivity in Out -of -Equilibrium Enzymatic Reactions.  J. Am. Chem. Soc.  143 , 5709 –

5716 (2021). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

13.  van Sluijs, B.  et al.  Iterative design of training data to control intricate enzymatic reaction networks. 

Nat. Commun.  15 , 1602 (2024). 

14.  Scheurer, C. & Reuter, K. Role of the human -in -the -loop in emerging self -driving laboratories for 

heterogeneous catalysis.  Nat. Catal.  8, 13 –19 (2025). 

15.  Singh, N.  et al.  A generalized platform for artificial intelligence -powered autonomous enzyme 

engineering.  Nat. Commun.  16 , 5648 (2025). 

16.  Chen, J., Singh, N., Lu, J., Lane, S. T. & Zhao, H. Artificial intelligence –powered biofoundries for protein 

engineering and metabolic engineering.  Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.  96 , 103380 (2025). 

17.  Collins, E., Langer, R. & Anderson, D. G. Self -driving labs for biotechnology.  Nat. Comput. Sci.  5, 976 –

979 (2025). 

18.  Morita, S. & Terada, T. Enzymatic measurement of phosphatidylglycerol and cardiolipin in cultured 

cells and mitochondria.  Sci. Rep.  5, 11737 (2015). 

19.  Dvorak, P.  et al.  Maximizing the Efficiency of Multienzyme Process by Stoichiometry Optimization. 

ChemBioChem  15 , 1891 –1895 (2014). 

20.  Dvorak, P., Bidmanova, S., Damborsky, J. & Prokop, Z. Immobilized Synthetic Pathway for 

Biodegradation of Toxic Recalcitrant Pollutant 1,2,3 -Trichloropropane.  Environ. Sci. Technol.  48 ,

6859 –6866 (2014). 

21.  Kurumbang, N. P.  et al.  Computer -Assisted Engineering of the Synthetic Pathway for Biodegradation 

of a Toxic Persistent Pollutant.  ACS Synth. Biol.  3, 172 –181 (2014). 

22.  Maceiczyk, R. M. & deMello, A. J. Fast and Reliable Metamodeling of Complex Reaction Spaces Using 

Universal Kriging.  J. Phys. Chem. C  118 , 20026 –20033 (2014). 

23.  Vasina, M.  et al.  Advanced database mining of efficient haloalkane dehalogenases by sequence and 

structure bioinformatics and microfluidics.  Chem Catal.  2, 2704 –2725 (2022). 

24.  Lignos, I., Stavrakis, S., Kilaj, A. & deMello, A. J. Millisecond -Timescale Monitoring of PbS Nanoparticle 

Nucleation and Growth Using Droplet -Based Microfluidics.  Small  11 , 4009 –4017 (2015). 

25.  Lignos, I.  et al.  Synthesis of Cesium Lead Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals in a Droplet -Based 

Microfluidic Platform: Fast Parametric Space Mapping.  Nano Lett.  16 , 1869 –1877 (2016). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

26.  Zhu, A., Romero, R. & Petty, H. R. Amplex UltraRed enhances the sensitivity of fluorimetric pyruvate 

detection.  Anal. Biochem.  403 , 123 –125 (2010). 

27.  Aslan -Üzel, A. S.  et al.  An Ultrasensitive Fluorescence Assay for the Detection of Halides and 

Enzymatic Dehalogenation.  ChemCatChem  12 , 2032 –2039 (2020). 

28.  Cohn, C. A., Pedigo, C. E., Hylton, S. N., Simon, S. R. & Schoonen, M. A. Evaluating the use of 3’ -(p -

Aminophenyl) fluorescein for determining the formation of highly reactive oxygen species in particle 

suspensions.  Geochem. Trans.  10 , 8 (2009). 

29.  Sóbester, A., Leary, S. J. & Keane, A. J. On the Design of Optimization Strategies Based on Global 

Response Surface Approximation Models.  J. Glob. Optim.  33 , 31 –59 (2005). 

30.  Roux, E., Tillier, Y., Kraria, S. & Bouchard, P. -O. An efficient parallel global optimization strategy based 

on Kriging properties suitable for material parameters identification.  Arch. Mech. Eng.  67 , 169 –195 

(2020). 

31.  Smith, A. A.  et al.  Using a GPT -5-driven autonomous lab to optimize the cost and titer of cell -free 

protein synthesis. 2026.02.05.703998 Preprint at https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.02.05.703998 

(2026). 

32.  Ponce -Bobadilla, A. V., Schmitt, V., Maier, C. S., Mensing, S. & Stodtmann, S. Practical guide to SHAP 

analysis: Explaining supervised machine learning model predictions in drug development.  Clin. 

Transl. Sci.  17 , e70056 (2024). 

33.  Hess, D.  et al.  Exploring mechanism of enzyme catalysis by on -chip transient kinetics coupled with 

global data analysis and molecular modeling.  Chem  7, 1066 –1079 (2021). 

34.  Hess, D., Rane, A., deMello, A. J. & Stavrakis, S. High -Throughput, Quantitative Enzyme Kinetic 

Analysis in Microdroplets Using Stroboscopic Epifluorescence Imaging.  Anal. Chem.  87 , 4965 –4972 

(2015). 

35.  Iakovlev, A. P., Erofeev, A. S. & Gorelkin, P. V. Novel Pumping Methods for Microfluidic Devices: A 

Comprehensive Review.  Biosensors  12 , 956 (2022). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

36.  A quick overview of surface -enhanced Raman spectroscopy. 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/chapter/monograph/abs/pii/B9780444527790000076 

doi:10.1016/B978 -0-444 -52779 -0.00007 -6. 

37.  Zhang, Q.  et al.  Integrating protein language models and automatic biofoundry for enhanced protein 

evolution.  Nat. Commun.  16 , 1553 (2025). 

38.  Carruthers, D. N.  et al.  Automation and machine learning drive rapid optimization of isoprenol 

production in Pseudomonas putida.  Nat. Commun.  16 , 11489 (2025). 

39.  Rapp, J. T., Bremer, B. J. & Romero, P. A. Self -driving laboratories to autonomously navigate the 

protein fitness landscape.  Nat. Chem. Eng.  1, 97 –107 (2024). 

40.  Boiko, D. A., MacKnight, R., Kline, B. & Gomes, G. Autonomous chemical research with large language 

models.  Nature  624 , 570 –578 (2023). 

41.  Qiu, Y.  et al.  BioMARS: A Multi -Agent Robotic System for Autonomous Biological Experiments. 

Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2507.01485 (2025). 

42.  Song, T.  et al.  A Multiagent -Driven Robotic AI Chemist Enabling Autonomous Chemical Research On 

Demand.  J. Am. Chem. Soc.  147 , 12534 –12545 (2025). 

43.  Darvish, K.  et al.  ORGANA: A robotic assistant for automated chemistry experimentation and 

characterization.  Matter  8, 101897 (2025). 

44.  Tachibana, R., Zhang, K., Zou, Z., Burgener, S. & Ward, T. R. A Customized Bayesian Algorithm to 

Optimize Enzyme -Catalyzed Reactions.  ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng.  11 , 12336 –12344 (2023). 

45.  Grimm, M., Paul, S. & Chainais, P. Process -constrained batch Bayesian approaches for yield 

optimization in multi -reactor systems.  Comput. Chem. Eng.  189 , 108779 (2024). 

46.  Mazurenko, S., Prokop, Z. & Damborsky, J. Machine Learning in Enzyme Engineering.  ACS Catal.  10 ,

1210 –1223 (2020). 

47.  Martin, H. G.  et al.  Perspectives for self -driving labs in synthetic biology.  Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.  79 ,

102881 (2023). 

48.  Fang, K. -T. & Wang, Y.  Number -Theoretic Methods in Statistics . (CRC Press, 1993). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.04.730034 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

49.  Buryska, T.  et al.  Controlled Oil/Water Partitioning of Hydrophobic Substrates Extending the 

Bioanalytical Applications of Droplet -Based Microfluidics.  Anal. Chem.  91 , 10008 –10015 (2019). 

50.  Zinchenko, A.  et al.  One in a Million: Flow Cytometric Sorting of Single Cell -Lysate Assays in 

Monodisperse Picolitre Double Emulsion Droplets for Directed Evolution.  Anal. Chem.  86 , 2526 –

2533 (2014). 

51.  van Hylckama Vlieg, J. E. T.  et al.  Halohydrin Dehalogenases Are Structurally and Mechanistically 

Related to Short -Chain Dehydrogenases/Reductases.  J. Bacteriol.  183 , 5058 –5066 (2001). 

52.  Virtanen, P.  et al.  SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in Python.  Nat. Methods 

17 , 261 –272 (2020).