Title: Beyond Retrieval: Analytic Memory for Multimodal Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.29440v2

Published Time: Wed, 05 Aug 2026 00:36:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Beyond Retrieval: Analytic Memory for Multimodal Agents 

Zhoujin Tian 1, Hao Zhang 2, Yao Tian 2*, Cheng Chen 2

Yakun Li 2, Lei Zhang 2, Xiaofang Zhou 1*1HKUST, 2ByteDance 

{ztianaf, zxf}@cse.ust.hk {zhanghao.ai, yao.tian, chencheng.sg, liyakun.hit, zhanglei.michael}@bytedance.com 

Abstract 

Long-term multimodal memory must support not only retrieving relevant information but also computing over observations accumulated across interactions. Existing systems largely emphasize retrieval memory , organizing inter-action histories through summaries and indexes to return query-relevant information at multiple granularities, from high-level abstractions to underlying records. In this paper, we formulate 

analytic memory as a complementary abstrac-tion that organizes recurring multimodal obser-vations into queryable structures supporting fil-tering, aggregation, ranking, and temporal com-parison. We present A DA MM, a framework that jointly supports retrieval and analytic mem-ory. Rather than relying on application-defined schemas, A DA MM extracts provenance-linked attribute-value observations from dialogue, im-ages, and contextual metadata, discovers re-curring field structures, and materializes them for analytical access. At inference time, a memory-aware planner decomposes queries into retrieval and analytic operations and routes each operation to the appropriate tools. Exper-iments on two long-term multimodal memory benchmarks, MemEye and MemGallery, show that A DA MM improves performance by up to 11.3% and 6.9%, respectively. 

1 Introduction 

As Large Language Model (LLM) agents interact with users over increasingly long horizons, they accumulate extensive multimodal histories – in-cluding dialogues, screenshots, images, documents, and contextual observations – that quickly exceed the finite context windows of their backbone mod-els (He et al., 2024; Koh et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b). Multimodal memory systems, which retain and organize such histories to support future reasoning (Wang and Chen, 2025; Feng et al., 2026), have therefore become essential 

> *

Corresponding authors. Long -term Historical Multi -modal Conversation Sessions 

> Good morning!
> Good morning!
> I ordered …
> Coffee can …
> …
> Apr 23
> …

……  

> User Queries

…… 

> Apr 24
> Any reason …
> Some exercise

……   

> May 1
> Shopping at …
> Lots of things !
> …
> May 2
> Good sleep !
> Good news …
> I am having
> lunch with …
> …
> ……
> ……
> Average
> sleep duration
> over the past
> month?
> Traditional System
> A Bad sleep.
> Memory

… 

> Top -k
> Retrieve
> Our AdaMM
> Results
> Access
> Retrieval
> Memory

…

> Analytic
> Memory
> Tools

… 

> $3.45
> Starbucks
> Americano
> Which
> market last
> time?
> …

Figure 1: Long-term multimodal interaction histories contain observations distributed across sessions, modal-ities, and time. Answering user queries may require either retrieving specific past events or performing ana-lytical operations, such as temporal selection and aggre-gation, over multiple observations. 

and are widely adopted in applications such as per-sonal assistance (Li et al., 2024; Feng et al., 2026), embodied interaction (Driess et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024a), and tool-augmented workflows (Yao et al., 2023; Schick et al., 2023). Recent multimodal memory systems have ex-plored a broad range of designs, including textual abstraction (Feng et al., 2026), specialized memory types (Nguyen et al., 2026), hybrid stores (Wang and Chen, 2025), and cross-modal retrieval (Lu et al., 2026). Most existing systems follow a retrieve-then-answer paradigm, conditioning an LLM on a bounded set of relevant memories, which we denote as retrieval memory. Such systems are effective at selecting relevant memories from long interaction histories. However, long interaction histories also accumulate recurring observations arXiv:2607.29440v2 [cs.AI] 4 Aug 2026 that collectively form an append-only log. Analyti-cal questions over such histories require complete, correctly scoped records and operations such as filtering, aggregation, ranking, and temporal se-lection. The relevance-based approach adopted by retrieval memory systems therefore creates a coverage–context trade-off: a small retrieval set may omit required observations, whereas a larger retrieval set consumes the limited context bud-get and introduces redundant or distracting evi-dence. For example, as illustrated in Figure 1, computing a user’s average sleep duration over the past month requires collecting all relevant mea-surements across multiple screenshots before ag-gregation; incomplete retrieval may therefore pro-duce a biased estimate. We call this gap between relevance-based retrieval and analytic the retrieval– analysis mismatch .To bridge this gap, our key insight is that a mem-ory system should couple two complementary sub-systems: retrieval memory , which identifies and supplies relevant historical records as context, and 

analytic memory , which proactively organizes inter-action histories into reusable and queryable struc-tures and adaptively executes operations over them. Together, they support both flexible semantic recall and structured analysis, rather than requiring the LLM to repeatedly reconstruct the needed organi-zation from retrieved records. Realizing analytic memory, however, presents two key challenges. First, interaction histories do not come with an ex-plicit organizing schema, making it unclear what information should be preserved and how it should be structured to support future queries. Second, user queries rarely specify memory access strate-gies; the system therefore must reconcile what each query requires with what the evolving memory can currently support. Even questions over the same underlying records may require fundamentally dif-ferent operations (e.g., aggregation, ordering, fil-tering), posing challenges to the design of adaptive execution plans. To address these challenges, we introduce ADA MM, an Ada ptive Multi-view Memory frame-work that couples data-driven structure induction with memory-aware query planning. It main-tains two complementary subsystems: retrieval memory for flexible semantic access and analytic memory for executable analysis over recurring ob-servations. A DA MM extracts provenance-linked attribute–value pairs from multimodal interactions (e.g., {Sleep Time: 5.5 hrs} ), induces recurrent schemas, and materializes them as structured tables, which are accessible via tools, while preserving unstructured evidence in a hierarchical semantic graph. At query time, a planner adaptively com-poses different analytic and retrieval tools based on the query and the memory structures currently available. This design enables grounded seman-tic recall and structured analysis over long-term interaction histories. Our contributions are summarized as follows: • We identify a retrieval–analysis mismatch 

in long-term multimodal memory: retrieval-oriented interfaces support returning query-relevant information at multiple granularities, but cannot reliably answer queries requiring complete-range filtering, aggregation, ranking, or temporal selection over append-only interac-tion histories. • We propose A DA MM, a multimodal memory framework that complements retrieval mem-ory with schema-induced analytic memory. ADA MM discovers recurrent structures from multimodal observations, materializes them as queryable tables, and uses a memory-aware plan-ner to select or compose semantic retrieval with native analytical operations. • We evaluate A DA MM on two multimodal long-term memory benchmarks, MemEye and Mem-Gallery, where A DA MM consistently outper-forms strong memory baselines, and improves accuracy by up to 11.3% and 6.9%, respectively. 

2 Related Work 

Agent memory. Long-term agent memory pre-serves information across interactions, allowing agents to reuse preferences, observations, deci-sions, and task states beyond a finite context win-dow (Hatalis et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025). Existing systems explore personal-ized stores and tiered memory management (Zhong et al., 2024; Packer et al., 2023), scalable or agentic memory construction (Chhikara et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2025), and temporal or relational organiza-tion (Rasmussen et al., 2025; Huang et al., 2026). Recent schema-grounded memory moves beyond semantic recall by transforming textual interactions into validated, queryable records, but relies on application-defined schemas (Petrov et al., 2026). Despite these advances, existing methods remain largely text-centric, leaving underexplored how to induce reusable analytical structures from heteroge-neous multimodal histories and adaptively execute retrieval and analytical operations over them. 

Multimodal agent memory. Multimodal agent memory extends text-centric memory to histories containing heterogeneous visual observations. Ex-isting approaches broadly follow two directions: MIRIX and M2A translate visual content into cap-tions, summaries, or semantic abstractions for text-based retrieval (Wang and Chen, 2025; Feng et al., 2026), whereas MMA, VisualMem, and Omni-SimpleMem retain native visual evidence and re-trieve multimodal or image-backed memories (Lu et al., 2026; Nguyen et al., 2026; Liu et al., 2026). Although these methods improve visual evidence preservation, they still primarily organize histories as semantic memories. MemEye further reveals their difficulty in capturing fine-grained details and evolving visual states (Guo et al., 2026). In con-trast, A DA MM adaptively organizes multimodal histories into complementary analytical and seman-tic memories, enabling both precise analysis and context-aware retrieval for complex queries. 

3 Method 

3.1 Problem Formulation 

Let H = {Si}Mi=1 denote a multimodal interaction history, where each session Si = {Ri,j }ni 

> j=1

con-sists of multiple interaction rounds. Each round 

Ri,j = ( di,j , Vi,j , τ i,j ) comprises the user–agent dialogue di,j , visual observations Vi,j , and tempo-ral information τi,j . A multimodal agent memory system transforms the interaction history into mem-ory representations, M = Fbuild (H), and aims to generate an accurate answer ˆy = Fanswer (M, q )

for a user query q based on M.

3.2 Overview 

Figure 2 presents the overview of the proposed ADA MM framework. Given a long-term multi-modal interaction history, A DA MM constructs two complementary memories: analytic memory Mana 

induces recurring patterns as adaptive schemas for analytical queries while retrieval memory Mret 

hierarchically organizes interactions according to their semantics to enable flexible retrieval. At query time, A DA MM jointly reasons over the query and the memories instantiated from the current history, then constructs an execution plan by adaptively selecting and composing access tools to gather suf-ficient evidence for grounded answer generation. 

3.3 Analytic Memory Construction 

Analytic memory aims to uncover and organize recurring patterns across fragmented observations in multimodal interaction histories for analytical operations. The key challenge is that the meaning-ful attributes, which is in the form of key-value pair, and their co-occurrence patterns are unknown in advance, and each round reveals only a sparse fragment of the latent structure. To address this challenge, A DA MM treats H as a chronologically ordered interaction rounds {Rt}Nt=1 , performs At-tribute Extraction to adaptively identify attribute evidence within each round, then conducts Schema Induction to discover stable structures from re-curring cross-round patterns, and finally applies 

Memory Materialization to transform the induced schemas into executable analytic memory. 

3.3.1 Attribute Extraction 

Recovering recurring structure must begin from the evidence available within individual rounds, yet the attributes that will form a useful schema are unknown at extraction time. Record fragment ex-traction therefore aims to preserve explicit analytic observations from each round without imposing a predefined and unobserved pattern. Given Rt, A DA MM jointly examines its dia-logue and visual content to identify every grounded attribute–value correspondence: 

Ot = Extractor( Rt) = {(atℓ , x tℓ , p tℓ )}mt 

> ℓ=1

, (1) where atℓ and xtℓ are the observed attribute and its source-faithful value, and ptℓ points to the sup-porting dialogue span or image. Extractor is an LLM-based extractor that aims to identify all pos-sible pairs from each round. The resulting collec-tion {O t}Nt=1 captures these observations and their within-interaction co-occurrence patterns for sub-sequent schema induction. 

3.3.2 Schema Induction 

Given the extracted record fragments, it remains challenging to induce reusable schemas without assuming a predefined schema. New observations may reveal either a previously unseen structure or evolution to an existing one. To address this challenge, A DA MM first mine candidate patterns and then induces schemas through two processes: 

Schema Discovery creates new schemas, while 

Schema Evolution extends existing ones with con-sistently co-occurring attributes. Historical Sessions Memory Construction 

Analytic 

Memory 

Retrieval 

Memory 

Attribute Extraction   

> {sleep: 4.8h, heart: 78 }
> ⋯

Schema 

Induction  

> {sleep, heart}

✓ 

> {hospital, doctor }

×

Memory 

Materialization 

Open -ended Events Hierarchical Retrieval Memory 

Topic →

Episode →

Event 

> Topic

Adaptive Query Processing           

> Query
> conditioned
> metadata
> retrieval
> Lookup ·Filter ·
> Compute ·Rank
> SemanticMatch ·
> EventLocate
> LLM
> Planner
> Query Plan
> 1EventLocate :
> go to hospital
> 2 Compute:
> average sleep
> time after hospital

Progressive Tool Execution        

> EventLocate (go to hospital )
> Apr 26
> Compute( AVG ( sleep )where
> date > Apr 26 )
> 8.1 h

Apr 

24 

…… 

…… 

Apr 

26 

…… 

…… 

May 

1

…… 

…… 

May 

2

…… 

…… 

…

…

…

User Queries         

> My average sleep
> after going to the
> hospital ?
> Iwent to hospital
> this morning …
> 8.1 hours.
> {hospital: A, doctor: Bob}
> {sleep: 7. 9h, heart: 6 0}
> ⋯
> Episode 2
> Episode N
> Episode 1

High -level Plan Generation    

> Table Metadata
> schema: {sleep, heart}
> Episode Metadata
> episodes: {Episode 1, …}
> Access
> Tools
> {sleep: 8.2h, heart: 58 }
> ⋯
> ⋯

✓                

> date sleep heart
> Apr 244.8h78
> May 18.2 h58
> May 27.9 h60
> ⋯⋯⋯

Figure 2: Overview of A DA MM. It complements recall-oriented retrieval memory with schema-induced analytic memory over recurrent multimodal observations. At query time, an operation planner jointly considers the query and the instantiated memories to select designed access tools for answer generation. 

Candidate Pattern Mining. For each extracted record fragment Ot, let 

At = {atℓ | (atℓ , x tℓ , p tℓ ) ∈ O t} (2) denote the set of attributes contained in Ot. A reli-able candidate pattern C is a set of attributes that consistently recur sufficient interactions together. Following the Apriori framework for frequent-itemset mining (Agrawal and Srikant, 1994), we use support to quantify information recurrence. Specifically, the support of a candidate pattern C

after processing round t is 

supp t(C) = 

tX

s=1 

I[C ⊆ A s] , (3) ADA MM retains C as a candidate pattern if 

supp t(C) ≥ θs, (4) which ensures that C recurs across sufficient inter-action rounds to yield a populated schema. 

Schema Discovery. For each recurrent candi-date C, A DA MM first compares it with the active schemas before round t. If C exhibits an attribute structure distinct from all existing schemas, it is evaluated for reliable new-schema discovery. Fol-lowing a variant of Apriori algorithm (Omiecinski, 2003), we use all-confidence to measure within-pattern co-occurrence consistency, defined as 

all-conf t(C) = supp t(C)max a∈C supp t({a}) . (5) A candidate is admitted as a new schema if 

all-conf t(C) ≥ θa. (6) This constraint requires the complete candidate to occur reliably whenever any of its constituent at-tributes occurs, thereby preventing an ubiquitous attribute from being merged with most patterns. To avoid admitting a qualified candidate together with its qualified subsets, A DA MM retains only inclusion-maximal novel candidates. 

Schema Evolution. For an existing schema A,if C ⊆ A , then C is already subsumed by it. If C

contains A, A DA MM treats C as a potential exten-sion of A. Let ∆ = C \ A be the newly added attributes. We use extension confidence to measure how consistently ∆ accompany occurrences of A,defined as 

ext-conf t(C | A ) = supp t(C)supp t(A) (7) When ext-conf t(C | A ) ≥ θe, the candidate pro-vides sufficient evidence that ∆ have become stable components of A, and we update the schema A to 

C. Otherwise, A remains unchanged. 

3.3.3 Memory Materialization 

Considering that each schema specifies a stable set of attributes and each matched interaction provides their co-occurring values, the induced patterns nat-urally align with relational tables. A DA MM there-fore materializes each schema A into a table TA,using its attributes as columns and the matched interactions as rows. Specifically, for a newly discovered schema A,its attributes first define the data columns. Given these attributes and their sampled values from the corresponding extracted observations {O t}Nt=1 , a language model generates the table metadata, in-cluding its name and description, and infers the type of each column. We then populate the table at the interaction level. For each associated round Rt,every extracted tuple (atℓ , x tℓ , p tℓ ) ∈ O t whose attribute belongs to A is mapped to the correspond-ing column, and values extracted from the same round jointly form one row. Two auxiliary columns, 

order and time , record the position and occur-rence time of the source interaction, respectively. Any value not observed in that round is left empty. When a schema evolves from A to A′ = A ∪ ∆,the attributes in ∆ are appended as new columns to the existing table TA. A DA MM then updates the table information and rematerializes the rows from their associated observations following the same procedure. The resulting analytic memory Mana 

is represented as the collection of tables TA.

3.4 Retrieval Memory Construction 

Beyond structured analytic queries, many user re-quests can be addressed through direct semantic matching against past interactions. Retrieval mem-ory is designed for such queries by preserving open-ended events, relations, and visual details that may not exhibit recurring schemas. It complements an-alytic memory by enabling flexible semantic re-trieval and context-aware reasoning over interac-tion histories. Following prior work on hierarchical memory organization (Yue et al., 2026), we organize re-trieval memory Mret into three levels: topic →

episode → event . Events preserve fine-grained evidence within individual interactions, episodes group temporally adjacent and semantically coher-ent events, and topics aggregate related episodes into broader semantic contexts. Each level main-tains a concise description, separate textual and visual representations, and temporal information. Appendix A details its incremental construction. 

3.5 Adaptive Query Processing 

Different queries place different demands on mem-ory: some require semantic retrieval over open-ended events, whereas others require structured computation over analytic memory. No single re-trieval primitive can adequately support this full range of needs, calling for an adaptive mechanism that selects and composes operations according to query intent and the structures available in memory. ADA MM therefore abstracts the native capabili-ties of analytic and retrieval memory as operation-specific tools, and employs a joint query–memory planner to generate an executable procedure for answering each query. 

3.5.1 Memory Access Tools 

Analytic and retrieval memory differ in their under-lying structures and consequently provide distinct native capabilities. To expose these capabilities at query time, A DA MM equips each memory with structure-specific tools. Specifically, each tool is represented as 

ξi = ( di, Θi, Ωi), (8) where di textually specifies its tool function, while 

Θi and Ωi define its typed arguments and return schema. Table 1 summarizes the access tools de-signed for analytic and retrieval memory. For ex-ample, for the analytic tool C OMPUTE , di specifies a deterministic computation over an induced table, 

Θi includes the target table, computation operator, target column, and optional constraints, and Ωi re-turns the computed result and matched records. For the retrieval tool S EMANTIC MATCH , di specifies relevance-based memory retrieval, Θi includes se-mantic query content and a retrieval budget, and 

Ωi returns ranked memory units with their rele-vance scores. Detailed specifications are provided in Appendix B. Table 1: Access tools for analytic and retrieval memory.     

> Memory Tools Capability
> Analytic LOOKUP , F ILTER ,COMPUTE , R ANK
> Exact record access and deterministic computation. Retrieval SEMANTIC MATCH ,EVENT LOCATE
> Relevance-based retrieval and event localization.

3.5.2 Memory-Aware Joint Query Planning 

The access tools specify how each memory can be queried. However, users describe desired out-comes rather than access procedures, and a feasible operation also depends on what the current mem-ory contains. To bridge this gap, A DA MM first constructs a query-conditioned planning context that exposes relevant memory structure, and then employs an LLM-based planner to jointly reason over the query and this context, composing an ex-ecutable procedure for retrieving and analyzing the required information. The resulting evidence is subsequently provided to the answer model for response generation. 

Planning Context Construction. Valid query planning requires knowledge of the current mem-ory structures and their supported operations. Ex-posing the complete memory contents, however, introduces irrelevant information and expands the planning space. A DA MM therefore abstracts an-alytic and retrieval memory into compact meta-data, retrieves query-relevant entries, and asso-ciates them with their available tools to form the effective planning context. Specifically, we treat each analytic table T ∈Mana and retrieval episode P ∈ M ret as an indi-vidual planning candidate represented by textual metadata μT and μP , respectively. For each table, 

μT summarizes its name, description, columns, and sampled values, while each episode directly uses its description as μP . Together, these candidates form the metadata search space U. Given a query 

q, A DA MM ranks each μ ∈ U using 

hλ(q, μ ) = λ cos( E(q), E (μ)) + (1 − λ) TokSim( q, μ ), (9) where E(·) is a semantic encoder and TokSim( ·)

is computed using BM25 over the tokenized query and metadata, capturing lexical matches following prior works (Feng et al., 2026). After retaining the top-ranked μ, A DA MM augments their metadata with designed access tool descriptions, forming the planning context Dq to expose relevant memory candidates and available operations to the planner. 

Progressive Tool-Execution Planning. Com-plex queries often require multiple dependent op-erations, with the arguments of later tool calls de-termined by earlier outputs. Instantiating all tool calls upfront is therefore unreliable. To address this challenge, A DA MM separates high-level planning from progressive tool instantiation. 

High-level plan generation. Conditioned on the query q and planning context Dq,ADA MM first employs an LLM-based planner 

Planner( ·) to generate an abstract plan ¯π(q, Dq) = Planner( q, Dq) = (gℓ, ξ ℓ)Lℓ=1 , which specifies the information goals gℓ and the selected tool ξℓ at step ℓ without binding them to concrete arguments. 

Progressive tool instantiation. Guided by the above high-level plan, A DA MM instantiates tool calls sequentially. At step ℓ, it conditions on the preceding results Z<ℓ and optimizes: 

Θℓ = Planner( q, Dq, Z<ℓ , g ℓ, ξ ℓ),

Z<ℓ +1 = Z<ℓ ∪ Invoke( ξℓ, Θℓ), (10) where ξℓ and Θℓ denote the selected tool and its instantiated arguments. This allows later calls to consume intermediate results (e.g., a timestamp re-turned by E VENT LOCATE can serve as a temporal constraint for a subsequent C OMPUTE call). 

Question Answering. Finally, the answer model generates response conditioned on the query and an evidence context comprising the instantiated plan and its tool outputs. 

4 Experimental Evaluation 

4.1 Experimental Setup Benchmarks. We evaluate A DA MM on two complex multimodal memory benchmarks. Mem-Eye evaluates visual-memory granularity and rea-soning through paired multiple-choice and open-ended queries (Guo et al., 2026), while Mem-Gallery assesses long-term conversational mem-ory management (Bei et al., 2026). MemEye 

uses EM, BLEU-1 and LLM-judge for evaluation, whereas MemGallery reports F1, BLEU-1, and LLM-Judge scores. Dataset statistics are provided in Table 2. Benchmarks Sessions Rounds Images QA pairs MemEye 221 848 438 742 MemGallery 240 3,962 1,003 1,711 

Table 2: Benchmark statistics. 

Baselines. We compare against unimodal mem-ory agents, including A-Mem and MemoryOS (Xu et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025), which organize long-term textual interaction histories. Multimodal baselines include dedicated memory agents ( M2A ,

MMA , and MIRIX ) (Feng et al., 2026; Lu et al., 2026; Wang and Chen, 2025), which construct per-sistent memories from dialogue and visual observa-tions, and retrieval-based systems ( MM-RAG and 

UniversalRAG ), which directly retrieve relevant multimodal evidence for answer generation. 

Implementation details. We use GPT-4.1-nano and GPT-5.4-mini as answer and memory con-struction backbones for all methods. Text and im-age representations are produced by MiniLM-L6-v2 (Wang et al., 2020) and siglip2-base-patch16-384 (Tschannen et al., 2025), respectively. We use the top-10 retrieved memory units for retrieval memory baselines, and constrain our planner to generate at most three execution steps under a shared budget of 10 evidence units. Results are averaged over 3 runs. Complete parameter and prompt details are provided in Appendix C and F. 

4.2 Main Results Overall performance. Table 3 presents a com-prehensive comparison of A DA MM with represen-tative unimodal and multimodal memory frame-works across two benchmarks and answer back-bones. ADA MM consistently achieves the best result on every metric. With GPT-4.1-nano, it sur-passes the strongest competing result on MemEye by 7.3% and 5.8% percentage points for MCQ and open-ended questions, respectively, and im-proves MemGallery F1, BLEU-1, and LLM-Judge by 4.3%, 4.3%, and 6.9%. The advantage persists with GPT-5.4-mini, yielding gains of 3.1% and 11.3% points on MemEye and 2.6%, 2.2%, and 5.2% on the three MemGallery metrics. The con-sistent improvements on different settings demon-strate that A DA MM generalizes across answer for-mats, benchmark settings, and backbone capacities. 

Fine-grained task analysis. To further examine where the improvement arises, Figure 3 reports the Brand  

> Card
> Cartoon
> Home
> Multi
> Outdoor
> Health
> Social
> 20
> 50
> 80
> MemEye AR
> CD
> FR
> KR
> MR TR
> TTL
> VR
> VS
> 40
> 60
> 80
> MemGallery
> A-Mem
> MemoryOS
> M2A
> MMA
> MIRIX
> MM-RAG
> UniversalRAG
> AdaMM

Figure 3: LLM-as-Judge performance across fine-grained tasks with GPT-5.4-mini. 

LLM-Judge breakdown using GPT-5.4-mini. On MemEye, the largest gains over the strongest base-line occur on Card Playlog and Personal Health, with improvements of 18.8% and 16.7%, respec-tively. Both tasks require exact operations over recurring records, such as filtering observations, comparing values, or tracking changes, highlight-ing the benefit of analytic memory. ADA MM also achieves substantial gains on Multi-scene (11.1%), Brand Memory (9.0%), Outdoor Naviga-tion (8.6%), and Social Chat (8.2%), where relevant evidence must be retrieved and connected across in-teractions. The smaller gains on Cartoon Entertain-ment (6.1%) and Home Renovation (5.2%) are con-sistent with their greater reliance on direct visual-semantic recall. On MemGallery, the largest mar-gins appear in Conflict Detection (10.6%), Knowl-edge Resolution (10.5%), and Factual Retrieval (8.1%), demonstrating the value of structured ac-cess for reconciling and precisely locating infor-mation. A DA MM further improves Multi-entity Reasoning, Visual-centric Reasoning, and Visual-centric Search, while remaining comparable to the strongest baselines on Answer Refusal, Tempo-ral Reasoning, and Test-time Learning. Together, these results suggest that combining retrieval with operation-specific analytic access is particularly beneficial when answering requires more than se-mantic relevance alone. Further analysis of cost and case study are provided in Appendix D and E. 

4.3 Ablation Study 

We evaluate four ablated variants on MemEye to examine the contributions of the designed memo-ries and the memory-aware planning mechanism. The Health task emphasizes numerical and tempo-ral analysis over multiple personal-health records, Backbone Method MemEye MemGallery EM BLEU-1 LLM-Judge F1 BLEU-1 LLM-Judge GPT-4.1-nano Unimodal A-Mem 39.1 17.1 32.0 53.2 47.2 67.4 MemoryOS 42.4 15.8 27.6 53.4 47.1 65.9 Multimodal M2A 34.1 5.8 13.8 50.2 44.3 61.5 MMA 39.0 10.6 32.0 55.9 50.7 64.1 MIRIX 40.9 5.7 13.6 56.3 51.1 66.3 MM-RAG 42.7 16.6 42.2 58.3 52.4 67.3 UniversalRAG 43.1 16.5 40.2 57.7 52.4 67.0 ADA MM (Ours) 50.4 (+7.3) 21.2 (+4.1) 48.0 (+5.8) 62.6 (+4.3) 56.7 (+4.3) 74.3 (+6.9) 

GPT-5.4-mini Unimodal A-Mem 48.0 22.4 35.2 63.0 58.6 74.4 MemoryOS 48.7 21.8 33.3 64.5 59.0 75.5 Multimodal M2A 40.1 12.3 33.5 60.8 56.0 71.7 MMA 53.9 25.7 43.3 64.0 59.6 73.3 MIRIX 46.7 18.0 33.2 65.7 60.9 78.2 MM-RAG 61.8 29.7 49.4 66.5 61.9 78.7 UniversalRAG 62.4 30.4 48.6 65.6 60.8 77.4 ADA MM (Ours) 65.5 (+3.1) 35.9 (+5.5) 60.7 (+11.3) 69.1 (+2.6) 64.1 (+2.2) 83.9 (+5.2) 

Table 3: Main results on MemEye and MemGallery. Higher is better for all metrics. Bold values denote the best result within a backbone and red values denote improvements over the strongest baseline. 52     

> 56
> 60
> 60.7
> 56.1
> 53.2
> 57.4
> 58.9
> Overall
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 36.3
> 21.4
> 32.7
> 29.6
> 32.1
> Health
> 36
> 42
> 48
> 48.3
> 43.6
> 38.4
> 42.0
> 45.1
> Brand
> LLM-Judge Accuracy
> Full w/o Analytic w/o Retrieval w/o Context w/o Progressive

Figure 4: Ablation results on MemEye. Overall and task-level LLM-as-Judge accuracy using GPT-5.4-mini. 

whereas the Brand task primarily evaluates visually grounded recall of brand-related information. In 

w/o Analytic and w/o Retrieval , we disable the an-alytic memory and retrieval memory, respectively. In w/o Planning Context , the planner receives the entire memory metadata. In w/o Progressive Exe-cution , all tool calls and their arguments are instan-tiated before execution. 

Contributions of Complementary Memories. 

As shown in Figure 4, removing either mem-ory component consistently degrades performance. Without analytic memory, overall accuracy de-creases by 4.6%, with a substantially larger 14.9% drop on Health. This result highlights the im-portance of organizing recurring records into exe-cutable structures for analytical queries. Remov-ing retrieval memory instead causes a 7.5% overall drop and is particularly detrimental to Brand, where performance decreases by 9.9%. The distinct degra-dation patterns confirm that analytic and retrieval memory provide complementary capabilities. 

Contributions of Memory-Aware Planning. 

Removing the planning context reduces perfor-mance by 3.3% overall and by 6.7% and 6.3% on Health and Brand, respectively. This demonstrates that effective tool selection requires knowledge of both the query intent and the memory structures cur-rently available. Instantiating all calls before execu-tion also produces consistent degradation, includ-ing drops of 4.2% on Health and 3.2% on Brand. These results indicate that progressive execution is useful when later operations depend on information obtained from preceding calls. 

5 Conclusion 

In this work, we identify a retrieval–analysis mis-match in long-term multimodal agent memory, highlighting the need for executable operations over accumulated experience beyond retrieval. To address this issue, we introduced A DA MM, which couples hierarchical retrieval memory with schema-induced analytic memory and exposes their distinct capabilities through operation-specific tools. Amemory-aware planner further grounds tool selec-tion in the current memory state and progressively composes retrieval and analytic operations. Ex-periments on MemEye and MemGallery across two answer backbones demonstrate consistent im-provements from combining flexible recall with executable analysis. Limitations 

While A DA MM demonstrates promising results in long-term multimodal agent memory, two limita-tions remain. First, analytic memory depends on record fragments extracted from multimodal inter-actions. Incorrect or missing fields may propagate to schema induction, table construction, and down-stream computations. Future work could incorpo-rate confidence-aware extraction and cross-round consistency checks to improve robustness. Second, ADA MM uses a predefined set of access tools and thus requires manual extension for unseen, domain-specific operations. Future work could develop a self-evolving tool framework that identifies emerg-ing capability gaps and safely synthesizes, vali-dates, and integrates new tools. 

References 

Rakesh Agrawal and Ramakrishnan Srikant. 1994. Fast algorithms for mining association rules in large databases. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases , pages 487– 499. Yuanchen Bei, Tianxin Wei, Xuying Ning, Yanjun Zhao, Zhining Liu, Xiao Lin, Yada Zhu, Hendrik Hamann, Jingrui He, and Hanghang Tong. 2026. Mem-Gallery: Benchmarking multimodal long-term conversational memory for MLLM agents. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 40750–40784, San Diego, California, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Prateek Chhikara, Dev Khant, Saket Aryan, Taranjeet Singh, and Deshraj Yadav. 2025. Mem0: Building production-ready AI agents with scalable long-term memory. In ECAI 2025 , pages 2993–3000. IOS Press. Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, Wenlong Huang, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Ser-manet, Daniel Duckworth, Sergey Levine, Vincent Vanhoucke, Karol Hausman, Marc Toussaint, Klaus Greff, and 3 others. 2023. PaLM-E: An embodied multimodal language model. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning ,volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 8469–8488. PMLR. Junyu Feng, Binxiao Xu, Jiayi Chen, Mengyu Dai, Cenyang Wu, Haodong Li, Bohan Zeng, Yunliu Xie, Hao Liang, Ming Lu, and Wentao Zhang. 2026. M2a: Multimodal memory agent with dual-layer hy-brid memory for long-term personalized interactions. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.07624 .Minghao Guo, Qingyue Jiao, Zeru Shi, Yihao Quan, Boxuan Zhang, Danrui Li, Liwei Che, Wujiang Xu, Shilong Liu, Zirui Liu, Mubbasir Kapadia, Vladimir Pavlovic, Jiang Liu, Mengdi Wang, Yiyu Shi, Dimitris N. Metaxas, and Ruixiang Tang. 2026. Memeye: A visual-centric evaluation framework for multimodal agent memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.15128 .Kostas Hatalis, Despina Christou, Joshua Myers, Steven Jones, Keith Lambert, Adam Amos-Binks, Zohreh Dannenhauer, and Dustin Dannenhauer. 2023. Mem-ory matters: The need to improve long-term memory in llm-agents. In Proceedings of the AAAI Sympo-sium Series , volume 2, pages 277–280. Hongliang He, Wenlin Yao, Kaixin Ma, Wenhao Yu, Yong Dai, Hongming Zhang, Zhenzhong Lan, and Dong Yu. 2024. WebVoyager: Building an end-to-end web agent with large multimodal models. In 

Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6864–6890, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zhengjun Huang, Zhoujin Tian, Qintian Guo, Fangyuan Zhang, Yingli Zhou, Di Jiang, Zeying Xie, and Xi-aofang Zhou. 2026. LiCoMemory: Lightweight and cognitive agentic memory for efficient long-term rea-soning. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: ACL 2026 , pages 36842–36858, San Diego, California, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jing Yu Koh, Robert Lo, Lawrence Jang, Vikram Duvvur, Ming Lim, Po-Yu Huang, Graham Neu-big, Shuyan Zhou, Russ Salakhutdinov, and Daniel Fried. 2024. VisualWebArena: Evaluating multi-modal agents on realistic visual web tasks. In Pro-ceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 881–905, Bangkok, Thailand. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Yuanchun Li, Hao Wen, Weijun Wang, Xiangyu Li, Yizhen Yuan, Guohong Liu, Jiacheng Liu, Wenx-ing Xu, Xiang Wang, Yi Sun, et al. 2024. Per-sonal llm agents: Insights and survey about the capability, efficiency and security. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05459 .Zhiyu Li, Shichao Song, Hanyu Wang, Simin Niu, Ding Chen, Jiawei Yang, Chenyang Xi, Huayi Lai, Ji-hao Zhao, Yezhaohui Wang, Junpeng Ren, Zehao Lin, Jiahao Huo, Tianyi Chen, Kai Chen, Kehang Li, Zhiqiang Yin, Qingchen Yu, Bo Tang, and 3 others. 2025. Memos: An operating system for memory-augmented generation (MAG) in large language mod-els. CoRR , abs/2505.22101. Jiaqi Liu, Zipeng Ling, Shi Qiu, Yanqing Liu, Siwei Han, Peng Xia, Haoqin Tu, Zeyu Zheng, Cihang Xie, Charles Fleming, Mingyu Ding, and Huaxiu Yao. 2026. Omni-simplemem: Autoresearch-guided dis-covery of lifelong multimodal agent memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.01007 .Yihao Lu, Wanru Cheng, Zeyu Zhang, and Hao Tang. 2026. Mma: Multimodal memory agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.16493 .Viet Nguyen, Thao Nguyen, Vishal M. Patel, and Yuheng Li. 2026. Personal visual memory from explicit and implicit evidence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.28806 .Edward R. Omiecinski. 2003. Alternative interest mea-sures for mining associations in databases. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering ,15(1):57–69. Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. 2023. Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560 .Alex Petrov, Alexander Gusak, Denis Mukha, and Dima Korolev. 2026. From unstructured recall to schema-grounded memory: Reliable AI memory via iterative, schema-aware extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.27906 .Preston Rasmussen, Pavlo Paliychuk, Travis Beauvais, Jack Ryan, and Daniel Chalef. 2025. Zep: A tempo-ral knowledge graph architecture for agent memory. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13956 .Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettle-moyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 68539–68551. Curran Associates, Inc. Michael Tschannen, Alexey Gritsenko, Xiao Wang, Muhammad Ferjad Naeem, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, Nikhil Parthasarathy, Talfan Evans, Lucas Beyer, Ye Xia, Basil Mustafa, Olivier Hénaff, Jeremiah Harmsen, Andreas Steiner, and Xiaohua Zhai. 2025. SigLIP 2: Multilingual vision-language encoders with improved semantic understanding, localization, and dense features. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14786 .Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Man-dlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and An-ima Anandkumar. 2024a. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. Trans-actions on Machine Learning Research .Wenhui Wang, Furu Wei, Li Dong, Hangbo Bao, Nan Yang, and Ming Zhou. 2020. MiniLM: Deep self-attention distillation for task-agnostic compression of pre-trained transformers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33. Xiyao Wang, Yuhang Zhou, Xiaoyu Liu, Hongjin Lu, Yuancheng Xu, Feihong He, Jaehong Yoon, Taixi Lu, Fuxiao Liu, Gedas Bertasius, Mohit Bansal, Huaxiu Yao, and Furong Huang. 2024b. Mementos: A com-prehensive benchmark for multimodal large language model reasoning over image sequences. In Proceed-ings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 416–442, Bangkok, Thailand. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Yu Wang and Xi Chen. 2025. Mirix: Multi-agent mem-ory system for llm-based agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.07957 .Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Toh Jing Hua, Zhou-jun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, Yitao Liu, Yiheng Xu, Shuyan Zhou, Silvio Savarese, Caiming Xiong, Victor Zhong, and Tao Yu. 2024. OSWorld: Benchmarking multimodal agents for open-ended tasks in real computer environments. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 52040–52094. Curran Associates, Inc. Wujiang Xu, Zujie Liang, Kai Mei, Hang Gao, Juntao Tan, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2025. A-Mem: Agentic memory for LLM agents. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 38, pages 17577–17604. Curran Associates, Inc. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations .Juwei Yue, Chuanrui Hu, Jiawei Sheng, Zuyi Zhou, Wenyuan Zhang, Tingwen Liu, Li Guo, and Yafeng Deng. 2026. HyperMem: Hypergraph memory for long-term conversations. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 35237– 35254, San Diego, California, United States. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Zeyu Zhang, Quanyu Dai, Xiaohe Bo, Chen Ma, Rui Li, Xu Chen, Jieming Zhu, Zhenhua Dong, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2025. A survey on the memory mechanism of large language model-based agents. ACM Transac-tions on Information Systems , 43(6):1–47. Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and Yanlin Wang. 2024. Memorybank: Enhancing large language models with long-term memory. In AAAI ,pages 19724–19731. AAAI Press. 

A Hierarchical Retrieval Memory Construction 

Following the hierarchical organization commonly adopted in text-based agent memory (Yue et al., 2026), we structure multimodal interaction histo-ries into three levels—topic, episode, and event— enabling semantic retrieval to progressively local-ize relevant memories from coarse-grained themes to fine-grained interactions. Given chronologically ordered rounds {Rt}Nt=1 ,ADA MM incrementally inserts new events, up-dates the current episode, and assigns completed episodes to topics. 

Event construction. Each interaction round Rt

is directly instantiated as an event. The event re-tains the round’s dialogue and contextual content, interaction order, timestamp, and associated image identifiers. Thus, event construction preserves the original round-level evidence without an additional language-model extraction step. 

Multimodal representations. Each hierarchy node v maintains separate textual and visual em-beddings. Its textual representation is 

ztext  

> v

= Encoder text (dv), (11) where dv is the textual content of an event or the current episode/topic description. For an event e

with associated images Xe, its visual representation is obtained by mean pooling their visual embed-dings and then applying ℓ2 normalization: 

zvis  

> e

= Norm 1

|X e|

X

> x∈X e

Encoder visual (x)

!

.

(12) The visual representation of an episode or topic is computed analogously by pooling only the visual embeddings of children that contain images. Tex-tual and visual embeddings are not projected into one space; their cosine similarities are combined through late fusion, 

s(u, v ) = ¯λtext cos( ztext  

> u

, ztext  

> v

)+ ¯λvis cos( zvis  

> u

, zvis  

> v

), (13) where the weights are normalized over the modali-ties available to both nodes. Thus, the visual term is omitted rather than replaced by a zero vector when either node has no visual evidence. During retrieval, a textual query is encoded by Encoder text 

for text-to-text matching and by the text branch of 

Encoder visual for text-to-image matching, follow-ing the same fusion rule. 

Episode construction. Events are processed in temporal order. A new event is compared only with the current episode using Eq. 13. It is appended when the temporal gap is within one day and the multimodal similarity exceeds θepi ; otherwise, the current episode is closed and a new one is initial-ized. After insertion, a language model regenerates the episode description from the ordered contents of all its constituent events. Its textual embedding is recomputed from the updated description, while its visual embedding is recomputed from the image-bearing child events. 

Topic construction. When an episode is closed, it is compared with all existing topics without im-posing temporal adjacency. The episode is attached to its highest-scoring topic if the fused similarity exceeds θtopic ; otherwise, a new topic is created. A language model generates the topic description from all episode descriptions currently assigned to it. The textual and visual embeddings are then updated accordingly. Consequently, each new in-teraction only updates its event, episode, and topic ancestors, enabling the hierarchy to evolve without reconstructing the complete memory. 

B Memory Access Tool Specifications 

The six access tools expose the native operations of analytic and retrieval memory through a com-mon typed interface. Each tool is implemented as a concrete programmatic function with a predefined execution procedure; the planner only selects the tool and instantiates its arguments. Table 4 speci-fies the invocation arguments Θi, returned results 

Ωi, and function of each tool ξi; the typewriter-formatted entries are the exact keys exposed to the planner. For tools that may return multiple records or memory units, the result budget bounds the ev-idence passed to subsequent planning steps and answer generation. 

Analytic tool execution. Analytic tools execute read-only operations over a selected induced table. Before execution, table and column names are re-solved against its metadata, supplied values are cast to the corresponding column types, and operator– type compatibility is validated. L OOKUP matches the specified target column–value pairs, whereas FILTER selects rows satisfying the supplied column filters. C OMPUTE applies the designated operator to a target column expression over the optionally filtered rows and returns both the computed result and the matched rows. R ANK evaluates the target column expression, orders the eligible rows as re-quested, and returns the highest- or lowest-ranked rows within the result budget. 

Retrieval tool execution. Retrieval tools oper-ate over the topic–episode–event hierarchy. SE-

> MANTIC

MATCH scores memory units against the Table 4: Detailed access-tool specifications for analytic and retrieval memory.                   

> Memory Tool Arguments ΘiReturn ΩiFunction
> Analytic LOOKUP table ;key_values ;
> result_budget matching_rows Retrieves records matching the specified keys. FILTER table ;column_filters ;
> result_budget matching_rows Selects records satisfying the specified predicates. COMPUTE table ;
> target_column_expression ;
> operator ;
> optional_column_filters computed_result ;
> contributing_rows
> Performs deterministic computation over a selected table scope. RANK table ;
> target_column_expression ;
> order ;
> optional_column_filters ;
> result_budget ranked_rows Returns the top- or bottom-ranked records. Retrieval SEMANTIC MATCH query_content ;
> retrieval_scope ;
> result_budget ranked_memory_units ;
> relevance_scores
> Retrieves semantically relevant memory units. EVENT LOCATE query_content ;
> result_budget ranked_memory_units ;
> relevance_scores
> Locates event occurrences and their surrounding context.

query content using the multimodal similarity in Eq. 13, restricts candidates to the requested hier-archy scope, and returns the highest-scoring units within the result budget. E VENT LOCATE special-izes this process for event occurrences: it identifies query-relevant events, augments each with its fixed window of surrounding context, and returns the ranked event-centered memory units. Both tools expose the relevance score of each returned mem-ory unit and corresponding meta information (e.g., time, round order, etc.) for downstream planning and answering. 

C Implementation Details 

Models and decoding. We evaluate A DA MM with GPT-4.1-nano and GPT-5.4-mini as two sep-arate backbone settings. Within each setting, the same language model performs attribute extrac-tion, table-metadata and hierarchy-description gen-eration, query planning, and final answer gen-eration. We use deterministic decoding with temperature 0. Textual descriptions and meta-data are encoded with MiniLM-L6-v2 (Wang et al., 2020), while images are encoded with 

siglip2-base-patch16-384 (Tschannen et al., 2025); the latter’s text branch embeds textual queries for text-to-image matching. 

Parameter settings. Table 5 lists all manually specified parameters used by A DA MM. We select these settings on the validation split and keep them fixed across both benchmarks and backbone mod-els. The schema support threshold is an absolute interaction count. When visual evidence is unavail-able, the text weight is renormalized to one. 

Table 5: Key hyperparameter settings.                    

> Parameter Setting
> Schema support threshold θs= 4 rounds Schema all-confidence threshold θa= 0 .60
> Schema extension-confidence threshold
> θe= 0 .80
> Episode similarity threshold θepi = 0 .60
> Topic similarity threshold θtopic = 0 .65
> Text/visual fusion weights 0.60 /0.40
> Metadata semantic/token weights 0.70 /0.30
> Retrieved table/episode metadata ktab =kepi = 5
> Maximum planning steps 3Shared evidence budget 10 units

For budgeting, one retrieved memory unit in re-trieval memory or one matched row in analytic memory is viewed as one evidence unit; a com-puted result and its contributing records are pack-aged as one unit. No tool call may exceed the remaining shared budget. Retrieval-based base-lines use the same total allowance through top-10 retrieval. We report averages over three runs. 

D Cost Analysis 

Following prior work, we use token consumption to measure the cost of query processing over all 0 2 4 6 8 10  

> Average tokens per query (k)
> A-Mem
> MemoryOS
> M2A
> MIRIX
> MMA
> MM-RAG
> UniversalRAG
> AdaMM
> 5.1
> 5.5
> 4.6
> 6.4
> 7.2
> 7.7
> 8.0
> 8.3
> Single-modal context Multi-modal context

Figure 5: Query-time token consumption on Mem-Eye. Average input and output tokens consumed per query using GPT-5.4-mini. Lower is better. 

test queries under the same backbone and evidence budget. For each method, we count the total input and output tokens consumed by all language-model calls triggered by a query, including planning, pro-gressive tool instantiation, and final answer genera-tion. For multimodal calls, this total includes the image-input tokens reported by the model provider. Figure 5 shows that query-time token consump-tion largely depends on whether original images are included in the answer context. A-Mem, Mem-oryOS, M2A, and MIRIX answer from textualized memories and consume 4.6–6.4k tokens per query, whereas MMA, MM-RAG, UniversalRAG, and ADA MM retain visual evidence and incur higher token costs. A DA MM consumes 8.3k tokens, only 0.6k more than MM-RAG and 0.3k more than UniversalRAG. This modest overhead arises from query-conditioned planning and progressive tool instantiation rather than additional evidence, as analytic operations return compact results under the same budget. Given its 11.3% improvement in LLM-Judge accuracy over MM-RAG, the addi-tional cost is acceptable for the resulting gains in analytical capability and answer quality. 

E Case Study 

Constructed analytic table. To illustrate the con-struction of analytic memory, Figure 7 presents representative multimodal fragments from sam-pled Sessions 2, 3, and 4 of the MemEye Health task. For each interaction round, the LLM-based extractor first collects attribute–value ob-servations from its dialogue and dashboard im-age, such as time_range , meal_variability ,                              

> Query On April 22, which screen, if any, shows both the highest Time In Range and the lowest Meal Variability?
> Planning context daily_glucose_dashboard
> metadata and the R ANK specification.
> High-level plan
> 1. g1: Find the April 22 screen with the highest Time In Range. ξ1=RANK
> 2. g2: Find the April 22 screen with the lowest Meal Variability. ξ2=RANK
> Progressive instantiation and execution Step 1: highest Time In Range
> Θ1table :daily_glucose_dashboard ;
> target_column_expression :time_range ;
> order : descending;
> optional_column_filters :date = 2025-04-22 ;result_budget : 1.
> Ω1ranked_rows :HEALTH_S10:R5 (after-snack dashboard), time_range = 90.0 ,
> meal_variability = 28.0 .
> Step 2: lowest Meal Variability
> Θ2table :daily_glucose_dashboard ;
> target_column_expression :
> meal_variability ;order : ascending;
> optional_column_filters :date = 2025-04-22 ;result_budget : 1.
> Ω2ranked_rows :HEALTH_S10:R7
> (choice-comparison card), time_range = 79.0 ,meal_variability = 17.0 .
> Answer None. The highest Time In Range and lowest Meal Variability occur on different screens. (Correct)

Figure 6: Query-processing case study. The planner generates two analytic goals and progressively instanti-ates their R ANK calls under a shared date constraint. 

and evening_drift . Candidate pattern mining then accumulates the occurrence and co-occurrence of these attributes across rounds. Although their values and surrounding activities vary, the dash-board attributes repeatedly occur together across rounds; once they satisfy the recurrence and co-occurrence-consistency criteria, schema induction identifies them as a shared analytic schema. During memory materialization, the schema attributes de-fine stable columns, while the values extracted from each matched interaction populate one row. Finally, an LLM generates the table meta information, pro-ducing the daily_glucose_dashboard table, as shown in Table 6. 

Adaptive query processing. Figure 6 illustrates how the constructed table supports executable (a) Session 2 (b) Session 3 (c) Session 4 

Figure 7: Three representative multimodal interaction fragments sampled from the MemEye Health task. Table 6: A representative analytic table constructed from the MemEye Health task. 

Table name daily_glucose_dashboard 

Description Longitudinal daily-glucose records that support exact comparison and aggregation of recurring glucose patterns, behavioral targets, and time-in-range trends across interactions. 

Columns source , round_order , captions , date , evening_drift , late_window , meal_variability ,

morning_response , movement_goal , and time_range .                                                  

> source round _order captions evening _drift late _window meal _vari... morning _response movement _goal time _range HEALTH_S1:R2 1Daily dashboard showing . . . stable glucose trends 2.8 47.0 19.0 84.0 66.0 82.0
> HEALTH_S1:R3 2A sleek daily . . . time in range 4.3 57.0 16.0 84.0 66.0 80.0
> HEALTH_S1:R6 5Daily Glucose Dashboard . . . stable glucose trends 2.1 57.0 12.0 84.0 66.0 92.0
> HEALTH_S6:R5 42 Daily dashboard showing . . . metrics for meals 2.2 57.0 27.0 84.0 66.0 90.0
> · · ·
> HEALTH_S8:R6 60 A digital daily . . . time in range 4.3 57.0 17.0 84.0 66.0 91.0
> HEALTH_S12:R8 94 A daily glucose . . . time in range 1.3 57.0 19.0 84.0 66.0 82.0

query processing. Metadata retrieval first selects 

daily_glucose_dashboard and its applicable an-alytic tools. Because the date is explicit, the high-level planner produces the shortest valid plan: two RANK operations for the maximum time_range 

and minimum meal_variability under the same filter. The calls are progressively instantiated us-ing the typed arguments in Table 4. Since the two extrema occur in different rows, the answer model concludes that no screen satisfies both conditions. 

F Prompt Templates 

The key prompt templates used in A DA MM are pre-sented below. Figures 8 and 9 show the prompts for analytic memory construction and adaptive query processing, respectively. Prompt templates for analytic memory construction. 

Attribute extraction. 

You are a multimodal record extractor. Given one interaction round, identify every attribute–value observation explicitly supported by its dialogue, images, or contextual metadata. Do not assume a predefined attribute vocabulary, and do not infer facts absent from the input. Use concise attribute names, retain source-faithful values, and attach the dialogue-span or image identifier supporting each observation. Merge duplicate mentions within the round, but preserve distinct values. Interaction round: {Dialogue, contextual metadata, and images} Interaction order: {Order} Timestamp: {Time} Output: [{"attribute": ..., "value": ..., "source_type": ..., "source_id": ...}, ...] 

Table metadata generation. 

You are given the complete column set of a relational memory table and representative values sampled for each column. Generate a concise table name and a one-sentence description that distinguish the table from other memories. Preserve the provided column names without merging or renaming them, and infer each column type from TEXT , INTEGER , REAL ,

BOOLEAN , or DATETIME . The same procedure is used whenever a table is first materialized or its schema evolves. Table columns: {Complete column set} Representative values: {Sampled values by column} Output: {"table_name": ..., "description": ..., "columns": [{"name": ..., "type": ...}, ...]} 

Figure 8: Prompt templates for attribute extraction and table metadata generation. 

Prompt templates for adaptive query processing. 

High-level plan generation. 

Given a user query and a planning context containing query-relevant memory metadata and access-tool specifications, produce the shortest executable plan that can obtain the information required to answer the query. Each step must specify one textual information goal and exactly one available tool. Use only the supplied memory candidates and tools, order dependent steps so that earlier results provide the information needed later, and use no more than three steps. Defer all concrete tool arguments to execution time, and do not answer the query. Query: {Query} Planning context: {Memory metadata and tool specifications} Output: [{"goal": ..., "tool": ...}, ...] 

Progressive tool instantiation. 

Instantiate the typed arguments for the designated tool at the current plan step. Use exact table, column, and memory identifiers from the planning context. When the step depends on an earlier result, derive its argument from the supplied preceding outputs rather than inventing a value. Respect the remaining evidence budget. Query: {Query} Current information goal: {Goal} Designated tool: {Tool name and argument schema} Planning context: {Memory metadata} Preceding tool outputs: {Previous results} Remaining evidence budget: {Budget} Output: {One JSON object matching the designated tool’s argument schema} 

Figure 9: Prompt templates for high-level plan generation and progressive tool instantiation.