Title: Before Reasoning Fails: Pre-Evidence Procedural Failures in Agentic RAG

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.02011v1

Published Time: Tue, 04 Aug 2026 02:12:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Before Reasoning Fails: Pre-Evidence Procedural Failures in Agentic RAG *

Daeyoung Roh 

Independent Researcher 

dybroh@gmail.com 

Donghee Han 

KAIST 

handonghee@kaist.ac.kr 

Abstract 

Agentic retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) systems can fail before evidence-conditioned reasoning is tested: an agent may retrieve can-didate snippets but finalize without inspecting them. We study this failure mode as a proce-dural property of the agent trajectory, decom-posing wrong answers into pre-evidence disci-pline failures and post-gold-read failures using saved tool-call traces, retrieved evidence, read passages, and final answers. Across 12,000 paired trajectories on HotpotQA, 2WikiMulti-HopQA, and MuSiQue, the two failure types are largely non-redundant: the both-trigger rate is in [11 .2% , 13 .1%] across regex and spaCy entity extractors. We then evaluate R EAD -GATE , a minimal runtime invariant requiring an agent to read after search and before final-ization. Forced reading improves LLM-Acc by 14.9–19.9 points on trajectories that would otherwise skip reading and by 3.2–9.4 points on full minimal-reasoning cells. Additional diagnostics show that larger hidden thinking budgets do not necessarily increase evidence inspection. Together, these results indicate that evidence-gathering should be evaluated as a trajectory-level control problem, separately from answer-side reasoning. 

1 Introduction 

Agentic retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) sys-tems can fail before evidence-conditioned reason-ing ever begins. In multi-hop question answer-ing, we observe agents that issue a search, receive plausible retrieved snippets, and finalize an answer without reading any retrieved passage (Figure 1). Such trajectories are not ordinary reasoning fail-ures: the model has not yet inspected the evidence on which its answer is supposed to depend. This failure mode is specific to agentic RAG. Un-like fixed-context RAG systems, agentic systems 

> *

Code is available at https://github.com/Noverse0/ before-reasoning-fails Question Search Read 

> skipped
> Answer
> retrieved chunks (never read)
> pre-evidence finalization
> Agentic RAG: the agent searches, then answers without reading

Figure 1: Pre-evidence finalization in agentic RAG. The agent retrieves candidate chunks with snippets but final-izes without executing a read action, so the final answer is produced before evidence inspection. 

decide when to search, which retrieved results to inspect, which passages to read, and when to stop and answer (Nakano et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2023; Schick et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2024). This flexi-bility is useful for multi-hop questions, where the required evidence is often distributed across pas-sages (Yang et al., 2018; Ho et al., 2020; Trivedi et al., 2022), but it also introduces a procedural risk. An agent may retrieve relevant evidence yet answer from a snippet, read only part of the evidence chain, or terminate without reading at all. Final-answer accuracy alone does not reveal whether the agent actually executed the evidence-gathering procedure before answering (Liu et al., 2024). We argue that these failures should be separated from post-gold-read failures. If a model reads the necessary evidence and still answers incorrectly, the system may need stronger reasoning, better synthesis, or better supervision. If the model never reads the evidence, the problem is different: the execution procedure allowed the agent to stop too early. Treating both cases as generic answer errors hides an actionable source of failure in agentic RAG. To make this distinction measurable, we intro-duce a trajectory-level decomposition of wrong answers into failures of evidence inspection and failures after evidence has been read. The de-arXiv:2608.02011v1 [cs.AI] 3 Aug 2026 composition is operational: it is computed from tool calls, read counts, retrieved snippets, read pas-sages, gold evidence annotations when available, and final-answer correctness. We call wrong tra-jectories with insufficient evidence inspection dis-cipline failures , where “discipline” refers to pro-cedural compliance with the evidence-inspection protocol rather than answer-side reasoning. We call wrong trajectories after reading at least some gold-supporting evidence post-gold-read failures .These labels are not claims about latent model cog-nition; they are deterministic measurements over saved agent traces. This framing suggests a simple intervention. If some errors occur because the agent answers before reading, then increasing reasoning effort is not the only relevant fix. A runtime constraint may recover failures that a stronger or more deliberative model would not necessarily prevent. We therefore eval-uate R EAD -G ATE , a minimal environment-level invariant: after search, the agent must read before it can answer. If the model attempts to finalize without reading, the environment rejects the action and returns a corrective observation prompting the agent to read a retrieved chunk. The intervention does not change the model, retriever, index, judge, or reasoning budget. We evaluate this hypothesis on HotpotQA, 2WikiMultiHopQA, and MuSiQue using 12,000 paired OpenAI-controller trajectories. The tra-jectory decomposition shows that discipline fail-ures and post-gold-read failures are largely non-redundant: under multi-label reclassification, the both-trigger rate is in [11 .2% , 13 .1%] across regex and spaCy entity extractors. R EAD -G ATE directly targets the pre-evidence regime. On examples with zero-read finalization under the voluntary minimal-reasoning policy, forced reading improves LLM-Acc by 14.9–19.9 points; on full minimal-reasoning cells, R EAD -G ATE improves LLM-Acc by 3.2–9.4 points. Additional diagnostics show that evidence inspection is not simply a byprod-uct of larger hidden thinking budgets. A context-injection control further shows that delivering the same chunk text without a read action recovers only a minority of R EAD -G ATE ’s gain. Our contributions are threefold: • We operationalize pre-evidence procedural failures in agentic RAG through a trajectory-level decomposition that separates discipline failures from post-gold-read failures. • We introduce R EAD -G ATE , a minimal run-time invariant that prevents finalization before reading retrieved evidence, without changing the model, retriever, judge, or reasoning bud-get. • Across three multi-hop QA benchmarks, we show that the two failure types are largely non-redundant, that R EAD -G ATE recovers zero-read failures when residual discipline error is high, and that evidence inspection is a dis-tinct control axis from answer-side reasoning, not guaranteed by increased reasoning effort alone. 

2 Related Work 

Agentic RAG and retrieval control. RAG combines parametric language models with non-parametric evidence retrieval for knowledge-intensive generation (Lewis et al., 2020). Agentic systems such as WebGPT, ReAct, Toolformer, and ToolLLM interleave model reasoning with external tool actions (Nakano et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2023; Schick et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2024); retrieval-oriented systems such as IRCoT, FLARE, and A-RAG study how agents search, retrieve, and read evidence during multi-step QA (Trivedi et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023; Du et al., 2026). These works make retrieval and tool use controllable, but they do not isolate the execution-time case where retrieval is invoked and then bypassed before evidence in-spection. 

Policy learning versus runtime constraints. 

Self-RAG, CRAG, and recent RL-based search agents train or adapt retrieval policies through re-flection tokens, learned evaluators, or reinforce-ment learning (Asai et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2024; Jin et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025; Song et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025). R EAD -G ATE instead imposes a runtime invariant on the environment: after re-trieval, finalization can be rejected until a read action occurs. Related calibration and retrieval-triggering methods estimate when model knowl-edge is insufficient from confidence, uncertainty, or answer-level signals (Kadavath et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2022; Mallen et al., 2023; Press et al., 2023; Kuhn et al., 2023; Yoran et al., 2024). Our trigger is different: it is an observable trajectory violation in which the agent has retrieved candidates but has not inspected them before answering. Evaluation, grounding, and reasoning effort. 

Attribution, faithfulness, RAG evaluation, and LLM-as-judge frameworks assess whether final answers are correct or supported by evidence (Rashkin et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023a; Es et al., 2024; Saad-Falcon et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b), while agent benchmarks show that final outcomes can mask tool-use failures (Liu et al., 2024). Reasoning meth-ods such as chain-of-thought, self-consistency, pro-cess supervision, and verification improve or super-vise answer-side reasoning (Wei et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Kojima et al., 2022; Lightman et al., 2023; Dhuliawala et al., 2024). We instead evalu-ate the external action sequence itself: whether the agent executes evidence inspection before produc-ing the final answer. 

3 Framework: Pre-Evidence Failures in Agentic RAG 

We now make the preceding distinction operational. An agent trajectory consists of a sequence of tool actions, including search , read , and final , to-gether with retrieved snippets, read passages, gold evidence annotations when available, and final-answer correctness. Our goal is not to infer la-tent model intent, but to label observable fail-ure modes in the saved trajectory. The frame-work applies to agents that expose such discrete 

search /read /final tool actions; agents that inter-leave retrieval and generation implicitly, with no observable action boundary, are outside its scope (see Limitations). We define two primary error axes for agentic RAG (Figure 2). The first is discipline : whether the agent follows the evidence-inspection proce-dure before answering. The second is post-gold-read error : whether the agent still answers incor-rectly after reading at least some gold-supporting evidence. This distinction separates failures that occur before evidence-conditioned reasoning can be tested from failures that remain after evidence has been inspected. 

3.1 Trajectory-Level Error Decomposition 

For mutually exclusive accounting, we assign each wrong trajectory to the first matching bucket under a fixed priority order: 

Ewrong = Edisc ˙∪ E post ˙∪ E retr ˙∪ E amb .

The disjointness is therefore operational rather than semantic: a trajectory may satisfy multiple failure Wrong answer trajectory               

> discipline violation ?
> no-read / snippet-only /
> low-evidence final
> yes
> disc Discipline
> no
> gold-supporting
> chunk read ?
> yes
> post Post-gold-read
> no
> gold in retrieved top-k?
> no
> retr Retrieval
> otherwise
> amb Ambiguity
> Read-Gate targets
> this branch
> wrong =disc ̇∪post ̇∪retr ̇∪amb (priority order)

Figure 2: Trajectory-level decomposition of wrong an-swers. Each wrong trajectory is assigned to a discipline, post-gold-read, retrieval, or residual ambiguity branch. READ -G ATE targets the discipline branch by blocking finalization before evidence inspection. 

indicators, but the priority rule assigns it to exactly one accounting bucket. Discipline checks fire first, followed by post-gold-read, retrieval, and residual ambiguity. Section 3.4 separately analyzes inde-pendent multi-label indicators. 

3.2 Operational Failure Indicators Discipline failure. Edisc fires when the answer is wrong and the trajectory violates a procedural evidence-inspection condition. We use “discipline” in the procedural sense: whether the agent follows the required evidence-inspection protocol before answering. We use three observable subtypes: • No-read final : the agent emits a final answer with read count =0. • Snippet-only final : an answer entity appears only in retrieved search snippets, never in any read chunk. • Low-evidence final : named entities from the question are covered in read chunks at less than an 80% rate. Entity coverage is computed with a deterministic named-entity matching heuristic; implementation details are given in Appendix G. Because snippet-only and low-evidence subtypes rely on surface matching heuristics, we also report a strict no-read-only lower bound and threshold sweeps in the ro-bustness analyses. Pooled over the main cells, no-read final is the majority subtype and the only one that requires no entity-matching heuristic at all; we therefore treat it as the primary discipline signal and the other two as secondary diagnostics (Ap-pendix H). 

Post-gold-read failure. Epost fires when retrieval succeeded, the agent read at least one gold-supporting chunk, and the final answer is still wrong. This category is narrower than complete evidence-conditioned answering: in multi-hop QA, reading one gold chunk may still leave the sup-porting chain incomplete. Because this category depends on gold supporting evidence annotations, datasets without complete gold evidence fields sup-port only limited Epost analysis (see §4.1 for the dataset-specific caveat). 

Retrieval and ambiguity. Eretr captures cases where gold evidence does not appear in any top-

k retrieval result. Eamb is the residual bucket for cases that do not cleanly fit the operational defini-tions. In robustness analysis, residual ambiguity remains below 15% of wrong cases. 

3.3 READ -G ATE : A Runtime Evidence-Inspection Constraint 

The decomposition suggests a direct diagnostic in-tervention. If a wrong trajectory occurs because the agent finalizes before inspecting evidence, then the environment can enforce a minimal evidence-inspection invariant: after search, the agent must read before it can answer. READ -G ATE is a deterministic environment rule that enforces a single read-before-final invariant: if the model emits final with read count =0, the environment rejects the action and returns a correc-tive observation instructing the agent to call read 

on a promising chunk before answering. READ -G ATE operates at inference time. It does not change model weights, retrieval, the index, the judge, decoding temperature, or reasoning bud-get. A stricter checkpoint that additionally rejects a non-read action issued immediately after search 

(read-after-search ) is implemented within the same corrective-hint framework but is not part of the main R EAD -G ATE condition used throughout the paper; Appendix F explores a family of stronger procedural gates in this spirit. Operational details for the main R EAD -G ATE invariant (trigger pred-icate, corrective hint, rollout protocol) are in Ap-pendix B. 

3.4 Priority Accounting and Multi-Label Indicators 

Priority assignment is useful for mutually exclu-sive accounting, but it can mask co-occurring labels. We therefore also compute independent binary in-dicators for discipline and post-gold-read failure. We write Pdisc and Ppost for the corresponding trajectory-level event probabilities, estimated as cell-level rates in aggregate analyses and modeled with question-clustered logistic regressions in Sec-tion 5.5. This multi-label version is the basis for the both-trigger overlap test in Section 5.1. Robustness checks further report a strict no-read-only lower bound and vary the low-evidence threshold from 0.6 to 0.9. 

3.5 Predictions 

The framework yields three falsifiable predictions. (H1) Non-redundancy : discipline and post-gold-read labels should not collapse to a single failure axis. (H2) Conditional benefit : R EAD -G ATE ’s ac-curacy gain should scale with residual discipline error rather than with reasoning level alone. (H3) 

Differential response : R EAD -G ATE and reasoning effort should produce distinguishable signatures over (Pdisc , P post ), indicating distinct control axes. We test these predictions through multi-label re-classification, cell-level correlation, and question-clustered logistic models with trajectory-level label permutation. H1’s overlap test requires per-chunk gold evi-dence and is therefore established on HotpotQA and 2WikiMultiHopQA, the two datasets with such annotations; MuSiQue, which lacks gold chunk IDs, instead tests H2 alongside the other two datasets, with its discipline failures corroborated by a structural, annotation-free signal (90.4% strict no-read on the most severe cell; Appendix H). 

4 Experimental Setup 

4.1 Datasets 

We evaluate on three Wikipedia-style multi-hop QA datasets: HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018), 2WikiMul-tiHopQA (Ho et al., 2020), and MuSiQue (Trivedi et al., 2022). Unless otherwise noted, all main table cells use n = 1 ,000 examples per dataset– condition pair, paired by question ID across con-ditions; this includes the OpenAI controllers, the Gemini 2.5 Flash thinking-budget diagnostic, and the prompt-only and ctx-inject mechanism controls. Boundary ablations, including medium-reasoning READ -G ATE checks and the gate-family probe (Appendix F), use matched n = 100 samples and are interpreted only as scope checks. One measurement caveat affects the decomposi-tion. The post-gold-read bucket requires per-chunk 

gold supporting-evidence annotations, but the pro-cessed MuSiQue export does not contain complete per-chunk gold-evidence fields. We therefore use MuSiQue for aggregate accuracy, discipline fail-ures, and R EAD -G ATE effects, but restrict analyses requiring Epost or chunk-level gold-read quantities to HotpotQA and 2WikiMultiHopQA. 

4.2 Agent Interface and Retrieval Tools 

The main experiments use a two-tool agent inter-face with hybrid search and chunk read. The hybrid search tool combines BM25 and dense retrieval us-ing reciprocal-rank fusion with k = 60 and returns the top five chunk IDs with short snippets. The read tool expands a selected chunk ID to the full chunk text. Cross-search chunk-ID deduplication is enabled, so repeated chunk IDs are not repeatedly charged as new evidence. 

4.3 Controller Models and Reasoning Levels 

The main experiments use OpenAI gpt-4o-mini and gpt-5-mini with minimal and medium reason-ing effort, which separates backbone choice from reasoning-effort choice within gpt-5-mini. We use OpenAI controllers for the main within-provider analysis because they provide structured tool-call traces and multiple reasoning-effort settings for the same model. The 12,000 OpenAI trajectories come from three datasets and four conditions per dataset (1,000 questions each): (i) gpt-4o-mini, (ii) gpt-5-mini minimal, (iii) gpt-5-mini medium, and (iv) gpt-5-mini minimal plus R EAD -G ATE . Gemini 2.5 Flash is used only as an external diagnostic for hidden thinking-budget behavior. 

4.4 Evaluation Protocol 

All main cells use the same retrieval and loop con-figuration unless otherwise stated: a 0.6B dense embedding model specified in Appendix A, hybrid top-k = 5 , maximum loop budget 10, maximum token budget 128k, and temperature 0.0. The Gem-ini thinking-budget runs use the same search/read API and temperature 0.0; the thinking-budget com-parison holds the agent loop fixed and varies only the model’s hidden thinking budget. We report LLM-Acc as the primary outcome us-ing a fixed gpt-5-mini judge at temperature 0.0; the judge sees only the question, gold answer, and pre-diction and returns a binary semantic-equivalence label. Contain-Acc is reported as a secondary metric where short-form gold answers are avail-able. A cross-family Gemini 2.5 Pro re-judge of a stratified n = 450 sample agrees at κ = 0 .924 

with direction-preserving R EAD -G ATE gains on all three datasets (Appendix L). Full prompts and tool descriptions are in Appendix A. Paired analyses use shared question IDs be-tween conditions. We report exact McNemar tests for paired correctness changes and use question-clustered standard errors in logistic models to ac-count for repeated evaluation of the same question under different conditions. 

Reproducibility. At the URL in the title footnote, we release the full agent-loop and R EAD -G ATE 

implementation, the reproduction scripts used to generate every table and figure in this paper, and a corpus of 33,950 raw agent trajectories (49 files), including the 12,000-trajectory paired corpus with per-question discipline and post-gold-read labels; the trajectories back every per-question table ex-cept two externally-sourced A-RAG comparison rows, documented in the release. The release also includes cached analysis outputs that reproduce every reported number without further API access. 

5 Experiments 

We evaluate the three predictions from Section 3.5. Section 5.1 tests non-redundancy; Sections 5.2– 5.3 evaluate when R EAD -G ATE helps; and Sec-tions 5.5–5.6 compare runtime constraints with reasoning-effort changes. 

5.1 Discipline and Post-Gold-Read Failures Are Non-Redundant 

We first test whether discipline and post-gold-read failures identify distinct trajectory regimes rather than two names for the same wrong answers. Fig-ure 3 shows a three-regime pattern: discipline fail-ures are lower under gpt-4o-mini (HotpotQA 7.6%, 2WikiMultiHopQA 12.8%), rise under gpt-5-mini minimal (13.3%, 22.1%, and 57.0% on HotpotQA, 2WikiMultiHopQA, and MuSiQue), and decrease under medium reasoning on HotpotQA and 2Wiki-MultiHopQA. Post-gold-read errors follow a different curve on datasets with gold-evidence annotations: they generally decrease with reasoning effort, while dis-cipline failures peak in the low-effort regime where Figure 3: Error indicators across agent regimes. Disci-pline failures peak at gpt-5-mini minimal; post-gold-read errors follow a different curve. The x-axis is regime-level, not a scaling curve. Table 1: Forced reading recovers skipped-read cases.                   

> LLM-Acc on the self-selected zero-read subset; paired McNemar p < 10 −4. This estimates a rescue effect, not the population-level marginal effect reported in Table 3.
> Dataset nZero-read Forced read ∆
> HotpotQA 215 58.1 73.0 +14 .9
> 2Wiki 261 42.1 62.1 +19 .9
> MuSiQue 617 22.5 37.4 +14 .9

the model can use tools but does not reliably exe-cute the evidence-gathering procedure. The strongest evidence for non-redundancy comes from a multi-label reclassification that al-lows discipline and post-gold-read indicators to co-occur. Among 3,807 wrong cases across the 12,000 OpenAI-family trajectories, the both-trigger rate P (disc ∧ post | wrong ) stays in a narrow 

[11 .2% , 13 .1%] band across two independent en-tity extractors (regex / spaCy en core web sm ;the binary discipline indicator agrees at Cohen’s 

κ = 0 .628 , observed agreement 82 .1% ). Under both extractors the overlap sits far below the 60% 

level at which the two axes would collapse into one, and the discipline-only share dominates the post-gold-read-only share by more than two to one (regex: 46.5% vs 21.4%; spaCy: 50.2% vs 19.5%; Appendix D). The small, extractor-stable overlap is the key result: many wrong answers oc-cur before evidence-conditioned reasoning is tested, while a separate set occurs after the agent has in-spected gold-supporting evidence. This full-trace accounting uses the operational indicators as imple-mented; post-gold-read interpretation relies on the HotpotQA and 2WikiMultiHopQA portions where complete gold evidence is available. A strict no-read-only lower bound preserves the same minimal-reasoning discipline hump: Hot-potQA 9.3%, 2WikiMultiHopQA 15.4%, and MuSiQue 51.5%. Thus, the main discipline signal is not driven only by snippet-only or low-evidence heuristics. This satisfies prediction H1. 

5.2 READ -G ATE Recovers Zero-Read Failures 

We next use R EAD -G ATE as a targeted interven-tion for trajectories that terminate before evidence inspection. The goal is not to make R EAD -G ATE 

a universally optimal decoding policy, but to test whether a measurable subset of errors occurs be-cause the agent finalizes before reading. If the model emits a final answer before reading, the en-vironment rejects the action and continues the loop. Retrieval, model weights, the judge, and reasoning effort remain unchanged. The most direct diagnostic test is the paired induced-read contrast. We identify examples with zero-read finalization under the voluntary minimal-reasoning policy, then rerun the same questions under a forced-read environment. Table 1 reports a within-subset paired contrast: on the zero-read subset, forced reading raises LLM-Acc by 14.9– 19.9 points across datasets, with paired McNemar tests below 10 −4. This subset is self-selected by the voluntary policy and is not a random popula-tion; the contrast measures the rescue effect on cases the agent would otherwise skip rather than the marginal effect of forced reading at the pop-ulation level (which is reported separately as the +3.2–9.4 full-cell R EAD -G ATE gain in §5.3). A prompt-only control across the three minimal-reasoning cells reduces zero-read behavior but does not replicate R EAD -G ATE ’s accuracy gain. In con-trast, R EAD -G ATE both nearly eliminates zero-read finalization and improves LLM-Acc on all three datasets (Appendix K). Thus, instruction alone can reduce the surface behavior, but it does not recover the accuracy gain of an execution-level constraint. A rank analysis shows that R EAD -G ATE primar-ily enforces that a read happens, not which chunk is read: forced reads remain rank-1 dominated, and 94% of forced reads on gold-annotated datasets land on gold-supporting chunks (Appendix B.2). On the full minimal-reasoning cells, R EAD -GATE improves LLM-Acc by 3.2 points on Hot-potQA, 5.3 points on 2WikiMultiHopQA, and 9.4 points on MuSiQue. Appendix B.1 reports the cor-responding overhead profile, including reads, loop count, corrective interventions, retrieved tokens, and LLM-Acc. Appendix B.3 reports Contain-Acc Table 2: Three-arm mechanism ablation. gpt-5-mini minimal, paired n = 1 ,000 per dataset. Deltas are LLM-Acc changes relative to no-R EAD -G ATE . R EAD -G ATE improves accuracy on all three datasets, whereas ctx-inject does not replicate the gain and is net-negative on 2Wiki.                        

> Dataset no-R EAD -G ATE READ -G ATE (∆)ctx-inj ( ∆)READ -G ATE vs ctx p
> HotpotQA 79.6 82.8 (+3.2)79.5 ( −0.1)1.4×10 −4
> 2Wiki 64.4 69.7 (+5.3)57.0 ( −7.4)<10 −22
> MuSiQue 34.2 43.6 (+9.4)38.1 ( +3 .9)1.0×10 −5

Table 3: READ -G ATE ’s gain tracks residual disci-pline error. Baseline and Edisc are no-R EAD -G ATE 

values; ∆ READ -G ATE is the paired LLM-Acc change. Minimal-reasoning rows recover accuracy (green); medium-reasoning rows do not (red), consistent with H2. †Medium rows use the same n = 100 matched-question subsample as the paired R EAD -G ATE ablation (Appendix B.1); the same no-R EAD -G ATE system’s full 

n = 1 ,000 cell mean is 90.8/88.8/67.1 (Appendix M) — the two are consistent measurements on different ques-tion subsamples, not two values for different systems.                         

> Effort Dataset Edisc (%) Baseline ∆READ -G ATE
> Minimal
> HotpotQA 13.3 79.6 +3.2
> 2Wiki 22.1 64.4 +5.3
> MuSiQue 57.0 34.2 +9.4
> Medium †
> HotpotQA 4.5 95.0 +0 .0
> 2Wiki 5.7 90.0 −7.0
> MuSiQue 21.7 74.0 −4.0

for the same cells; its direction matches LLM-Acc on all three datasets. 

5.3 READ -G ATE Helps When Residual Discipline Error Is High 

READ -G ATE is conditional: it helps most when residual discipline error is high. We compare disci-pline error before R EAD -G ATE against the R EAD -GATE change in LLM-Acc across full R EAD -G ATE 

cells (Table 3; visualization in Appendix B.4). Minimal-reasoning cells show a monotonic pat-tern: larger residual discipline error corresponds to larger R EAD -G ATE gains. Medium-reasoning cells have lower residual discipline error and show zero or negative gains. This is expected boundary be-havior rather than a contradiction. When the agent already reads reliably, the gate has little headroom and can introduce unnecessary interventions. This satisfies prediction H2: R EAD -G ATE ’s ben-efit tracks residual discipline error rather than rea-soning level alone. Dataset difficulty is unlikely to confound this pattern: a gold-chunk retrieval-success proxy has near-zero cross-cell variance and cannot explain the spread in ∆ READ -G ATE ; con-trolling instead for retrieval effort (total retrieved tokens), the correlation survives and strengthens (partial r = +0 .881 , n = 6 ), holding direction-ally at +0 .56 pooled with n = 13 cross-family cells. Given the small cell counts we report this as a robustness check rather than a confirmatory test. The cross-family cells are Qwen2.5-Instruct (3B/7B/14B) runs, where the same dose-response direction reproduces at r = +0 .629 (vs. +0 .728 

for the OpenAI family; Appendix D.1). Under medium reasoning, R EAD -G ATE does not merely fail to help; it increases mean loop count on all three datasets while accuracy does not improve. Matched-question-ID paired means (n = 100 /dataset) rise from 3.92 to 4.25 on Hot-potQA, 5.08 to 6.10 on 2WikiMultiHopQA, and 6.90 to 7.44 on MuSiQue, so additional trajectory steps do not explain the minimal-regime gains re-ported above. On 2Wiki-medium, where the effect is significant ( −7.0, Table 3), the max-loop rate rises from 15% to 35% under R EAD -G ATE , and all 8 paired cases where R EAD -G ATE breaks a pre-viously correct answer terminate at the loop cap with an abstention or partial final answer — forced reads exhaust the budget of an already-competent agent rather than giving it more useful steps. 

5.4 Mechanism: Not Merely Context Injection 

An alternative interpretation of R EAD -G ATE ’s gain is that it merely pushes additional chunk text into the agent’s context window. We test this with a three-arm paired ablation across all three datasets (gpt-5-mini minimal; paired by question ID; all arms share retrieval, backbone, loop budget, and judge). Arm (i) is no-R EAD -G ATE ; (ii) is R EAD -GATE ; (iii) (ctx-inject) uses the same trigger as (ii) but silently appends the rank-1 chunk text as a 

user -role observation without issuing a read tool call (Table 2). Across all three datasets, ctx-inject fails to repli-cate R EAD -G ATE ’s gain and is sometimes net-negative. On HotpotQA, ctx-inject changes LLM-Acc by −0.1 pp while R EAD -G ATE improves it by 

+3 .2 pp; on 2WikiMultiHopQA, ctx-inject reduces accuracy by −7.4 pp while R EAD -G ATE improves it by +5 .3 pp; on MuSiQue, ctx-inject improves ac-curacy by +3 .9 pp but still recovers less than half of READ -G ATE ’s +9 .4 pp gain. On every dataset, the paired R EAD -G ATE vs. ctx-inject contrast is highly significant (McNemar p ≤ 10 −4). Delivering the same chunk text without the read action therefore recovers at most a minority of R EAD -G ATE ’s gain and can be net-negative, so the gain is not explained by additional context alone. A follow-up four-arm probe on MuSiQue ( n = 500 , gpt-5-mini mini-mal) decomposes this further by separating delivery channel from the self-issued read action: relative to no-R EAD -G ATE , R EAD -G ATE gives +8 .2 pp, a fabricated tool -role injection gives +5 .2 pp, and a user -role injection gives +4 .4 pp, so the chan-nel difference ( +0 .8 pp) is not significant while committing to the read action itself adds a further 

+3 .0 pp over tool-channel injection (Appendix C.1). This decomposes, rather than contradicts, the three-arm result above: across these controls, the residual gain tracks the agent’s self-issued read action rather than the channel through which the text is deliv-ered. We treat this action-commitment account as the interpretation best supported by the controls, not as a conclusively isolated mechanism. 

When to enable R EAD -G ATE in practice. Apractical trigger for enabling R EAD -G ATE does not require gold labels. The most direct proxy is the zero-read finalization rate in unlabeled logs: if an agent often searches and then finalizes with 

read count = 0 , it is a natural candidate for the gate. Gold annotations are needed to evaluate accu-racy and post-gold-read failures, but not to detect the procedural violation itself. 

5.5 Runtime Constraints and Reasoning Effort Have Different Signatures 

We next ask whether R EAD -G ATE merely mimics additional reasoning effort, or whether it changes a different part of the agent trajectory. The results support the second view: procedural constraints and reasoning effort produce different signatures over (Pdisc , P post ) (Table 4; see Appendix J for a visualization). We fit question-clustered logistic models over the OpenAI trajectories; Epost terms restrict to HotpotQA and 2WikiMultiHopQA, which carry per-chunk gold annotations. READ -G ATE 

strongly reduces discipline failure (Pdisc OR 

0.38 [0 .35 , 0.41] ), as expected for an intervention 

Table 4: READ -G ATE and reasoning effort target dif-ferent indicators. The marginal R EAD -G ATE → Ppost 

OR is exposure-induced re-classification; the within-strata row ( n = 1 ,863 , read-exposure matched) is the be-havioral estimate. Correction details are in Appendix D.                                      

> Intervention Spec. Indicator OR 95% CI / test READ -G ATE
> full Pdisc 0.38 [0 .35 ,0.41]
> marginal Ppost 1.46 [1 .36 ,1.57]
> within-strata Ppost 1.00 [0 .84 ,1.19]
> Effort med vs min Pdisc 0.22 [0 .20 ,0.26]
> med vs min Ppost 0.51 [0 .43 ,0.61]
> Interaction effort ×axis stacked 2.02 p < 10 −4
> Perm. test —Tobs 18.6 pp p < 10 −4

that blocks finalization before reading. Its ef-fect on post-gold-read failure requires more care. Marginally, R EAD -G ATE appears to increase Ppost 

(OR 1.46 [1 .36 , 1.57] ), but this is a re-classification effect: the gate converts some no-read wrong an-swers into with-read wrong answers, making them eligible for the post-gold-read label. Indeed, all 106 paired Ppost label flips are 0 → 1 cases driven by read count changing from 0 to positive. To estimate the behavioral effect after read ex-posure is held fixed, we compare trajectories with 

read count > 0 in both conditions ( n = 1 ,863 ). In this within-strata comparison, R EAD -G ATE ’s OR for Ppost is 1.00 [0 .84 , 1.19] ; the stricter gold-read-both stratum (HotpotQA+2Wiki, n = 1 ,471 )gives the same OR, 1.00 [0 .83 , 1.20] . Thus, R EAD -GATE changes whether evidence is inspected, but does not measurably change post-read answering once read exposure is matched. Reasoning effort has a different signature. In-creasing gpt-5-mini from minimal to medium ef-fort with R EAD -G ATE off lowers both indica-tors: Pdisc OR 0.22 [0 .20 , 0.26] and Ppost OR 0.51 [0 .43 , 0.61] , with a significant effort-by-axis in-teraction (OR 2.02 , p < 10 −4). In other words, READ -G ATE mainly repairs whether evidence is inspected, whereas additional reasoning effort af-fects both inspection behavior and post-read an-swering. A within-cell-stratified label-permutation test further rejects exchangeability of Pdisc and 

Ppost under R EAD -G ATE (Tobs = 18 .6 pp, null 99th percentile 3.5 pp, p < 10 −4; Appendix D). This satisfies prediction H3: R EAD -G ATE and rea-soning effort produce distinguishable signatures over (Pdisc , P post ) even after read-exposure is held fixed. Table 5: Gemini 2.5 Flash thinking budget increases zero-read finalization on all three datasets. Paired contrast between thinking budget off ( b = 0 ) and on (b = 1024 ), with no R EAD -G ATE and matched n =1,000 question IDs per dataset.                   

> Dataset ZR ∆Net ∆McNemar p
> HotpotQA +5 .7pp −44 0.0025 2Wiki +24 .8pp −67 0.0001 MuSiQue +42 .6pp −73 3.1×10 −5

5.6 Hidden Thinking Does Not Guarantee Evidence Inspection 

We use Gemini 2.5 Flash as an external diag-nostic and repeat the thinking-budget contrast on three datasets. With the same two-tool loop and no R EAD -G ATE , enabling a 1024-token think-ing budget increases zero-read finalization on all three datasets and reduces paired correctness (Ta-ble 5). On HotpotQA, zero-read rises by +5 .7 pp with a net loss of 44 correct answers (McNemar 

p = 0 .0025 ); on 2WikiMultiHopQA, zero-read rises by +24 .8 pp with a net loss of 67 correct answers (McNemar p = 0 .0001 ); on MuSiQue, zero-read rises by +42 .6 pp with a net loss of 73 

correct answers (McNemar p = 3 .1×10 −5). The zero-read shift is largest on MuSiQue and small-est on HotpotQA, suggesting that the effect may be more pronounced when answers require longer evidence chains. Appendix E provides additional break-type analysis. The replication does not imply that reasoning ef-fort is harmful in general. In this diagnostic setting, the result supports the broader claim that hidden deliberation and evidence inspection can vary in-dependently: a model can spend more compute while still failing to execute the external evidence-gathering procedure. The larger shift on MuSiQue suggests that this failure mode may be more pro-nounced when evidence chains are harder to re-cover from internal memory alone. 

Cost–accuracy implication. Adding READ -GATE to gpt-5-mini at minimal reasoning closes 20 –

24% of the LLM-Acc gap to gpt-5-mini at medium reasoning, with modest overhead in reads and loop count (Appendix B.5). This suggests R EAD -G ATE 

can be a partial substitute for higher reasoning ef-fort when residual discipline error is high, but not a replacement for stronger reasoning. Appendix M reports an additional interface-granularity compari-son as supporting context. 

Robustness and scope. Robustness checks sup-port the same qualitative conclusions: the disci-pline signal is stable under low-evidence thresh-old sweeps and a strict no-read-only lower bound; paired bootstrap intervals exclude zero for the head-line R EAD -G ATE gains and induced-read contrast; and the label-permutation result remains signifi-cant under a within-cell-stratified null. Full de-tails are in Appendix D. Our claims are scoped to Wikipedia-style multi-hop QA, where snippet-grounded shortcutting and explicit evidence chains make discipline failures visible. 

6 Conclusion 

Agentic RAG systems can fail before evidence-conditioned reasoning begins. In Wikipedia-style multi-hop QA, we show that a substantial subset of wrong answers arises when the agent searches, observes plausible surface evidence, and finalizes without sufficient reading. These failures are not or-dinary post-evidence reasoning errors: the system has not yet reached the state in which its answer is grounded in inspected evidence. We make this bottleneck measurable through a trajectory-level decomposition that separates disci-pline failures from post-gold-read failures. Across paired trajectories, these indicators identify largely non-redundant error regimes and respond differ-ently to runtime constraints and reasoning-effort changes. R EAD -G ATE recovers zero-read failures when residual discipline error is high, but has little headroom when the agent already reads reliably. This supports a diagnostic view of R EAD -G ATE :it is not a universally optimal control policy, but a minimal intervention for testing whether evidence inspection itself is the bottleneck. 

Future work. Future work should test this de-composition across larger controllers, additional model families, non-English settings, and non-Wikipedia RAG domains, while studying whether the self-issued read action’s advantage over pas-sively delivered context generalizes across back-bones and domains. Final-answer accuracy remains necessary, but it is incomplete without trajectory-level measure-ments of evidence inspection. 

Limitations 

Scope. Our main experiments focus on cost-sensitive agent controllers (gpt-4o-mini and gpt-5-mini), with Gemini 2.5 Flash used as an exter-nal diagnostic. This operating regime is aligned with R EAD -G ATE ’s intended use: the gate has the most headroom when residual discipline er-ror is high (§5.3). Larger frontier controllers, ad-ditional model families, and non-English settings remain important directions for future work. The context-injection mechanism check (§5.4) is run on three multi-hop datasets at gpt-5-mini mini-mal, and the channel-vs-action decomposition (Ap-pendix C.1) is run on a single dataset and backbone; whether the self-issued-action effect generalizes identically across other backbones and datasets is open. The framework also presumes discrete 

search /read /final tool actions (§3); agents that interleave retrieval and generation implicitly ex-pose no read boundary to observe or gate on. 

Domain dependence. All datasets are English Wikipedia-style multi-hop QA benchmarks, where snippet-grounded shortcuts and explicit evidence chaining make pre-evidence failures visible. Other RAG domains have different snippet semantics and retrieval requirements. The trajectory-level decom-position may transfer, but entity-coverage thresh-olds and gate behavior should be re-calibrated per domain. 

Retrieval and safety. READ -G ATE is not a retrieval-quality fix: it assumes that search returns useful candidates often enough that forcing a read can expose relevant evidence. It also modestly in-creases reads-per-question and retrieved tokens (Ta-ble 6). Production systems should therefore com-bine forced-read mechanisms with retrieval-quality monitoring, filtering, and answer-side verification, especially in sensitive domains. 

Ethics Statement 

This work uses public QA benchmarks and does not involve human subjects or private user data. The main risks are deployment risks common to RAG systems. A procedural gate can improve evidence inspection, but it does not guarantee factual correct-ness. Systems using such gates should still retain answer verification, logging, and domain-specific safety checks, especially in high-stakes settings. The results should not be used to justify deploying low-effort agents without downstream validation. 

Use of Scientific Artifacts. Our experiments use open-source tools including PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019), with the Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B dense re-triever (Zhang et al., 2025) obtained via the Hug-gingFace (Wolf et al., 2020) library. For agent controllers and LLM-as-judge scoring we use Ope-nAI’s API (gpt-4o-mini, gpt-5-mini) under their sharing and publication policy, and Google’s Gem-ini API (Gemini 2.5 Flash as an external thinking-budget diagnostic and Gemini 2.5 Pro for cross-judge robustness) under their respective terms of service. All datasets (HotpotQA, 2WikiMulti-HopQA, MuSiQue) are publicly released by their authors under their original licenses and used as intended for research evaluation. 

Use of AI Assistants. We used Google Gemini to refine wording and polish prose. Some experimen-tal code was written with assistance from Anthropic Claude. All final scientific claims, experimental designs, and analyses are the authors’ own; AI as-sistants were used only as a writing and coding aid, and no AI-generated content was incorporated without author review and verification. 

References                      

> Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2024. Self-RAG: Learning to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Mingyang Chen, Linzhuang Sun, Tianpeng Li, Haoze Sun, Yijie Zhou, Chenzheng Zhu, Haofen Wang, Jeff Z. Pan, Wen Zhang, Huajun Chen, Fan Yang, Zenan Zhou, and Weipeng Chen. 2025. ReSearch: Learning to reason with search for LLMs via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19470 .Shehzaad Dhuliawala, Mojtaba Komeili, Jing Xu, Roberta Raileanu, Xian Li, Asli Celikyilmaz, and Ja-son Weston. 2024. Chain-of-verification reduces hal-lucination in large language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 .Mingxuan Du, Benfeng Xu, Chiwei Zhu, Shaohan Wang, Pengyu Wang, Xiaorui Wang, and Zhen-dong Mao. 2026. A-RAG: Scaling agentic retrieval-augmented generation via hierarchical retrieval inter-faces. Preprint , arXiv:2602.03442. Shahul Es, Jithin James, Luis Espinosa-Anke, and Steven Schockaert. 2024. RAGAS: Automated evalu-ation of retrieval augmented generation. In Proceed-ings of the 18th Conference of the European Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations , pages 150–158. Tianyu Gao, Howard Yen, Jiatong Yu, and Danqi Chen. 2023. Enabling large language models to generate

text with citations. In Proceedings of the 2023 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 6465–6488. Xanh Ho, Anh-Khoa Duong Nguyen, Saku Sugawara, and Akiko Aizawa. 2020. Constructing a multi-hop QA dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps. In Proceedings of the 28th Inter-national Conference on Computational Linguistics ,pages 6609–6625. Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F. Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun, Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig. 2023. Active retrieval augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 7969–7992. Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Zhenrui Yue, Jinsung Yoon, Sercan Arik, Dong Wang, Hamed Zamani, and Jiawei Han. 2025. Search-R1: Training LLMs to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09516 .Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez, Nicholas Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, Scott Johnston, Sheer El-Showk, Andy Jones, Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Anna Chen, Yuntao Bai, Sam Bowman, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Josh Jacobson, Jackson Kernion, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Ka-mal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Sam Ringer, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, and Jared Kaplan. 2022. Language models (mostly) know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221 .Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yu-taka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large lan-guage models are zero-shot reasoners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, and Sebastian Farquhar. 2023. Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances for un-certainty estimation in natural language generation. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich K ¨uttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rockt ¨aschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems .Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. 2023. Let’s verify step by step. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.20050 .Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. 2022. Teaching models to express their uncertainty in words. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Nelson F. Liu, Tianyi Zhang, and Percy Liang. 2023a. Evaluating verifiability in generative search engines. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 .Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Ao-han Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Chenhui Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. 2024. Agent-Bench: Evaluating LLMs as agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. 2023b. G-Eval: NLG evaluation using GPT-4 with better human alignment. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 2511–2522. Alex Mallen, Akari Asai, Victor Zhong, Rajarshi Das, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. When not to trust language models: Investigating effectiveness of parametric and non-parametric mem-ories. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 9802–9822. Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, Xu Jiang, Karl Cobbe, Tyna Eloundou, Gretchen Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew Knight, Benjamin Chess, and John Schulman. 2021. We-bGPT: Browser-assisted question-answering with hu-man feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332 .Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas K ¨opf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Te-jani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. 2019. PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems .Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A. Smith, and Mike Lewis. 2023. Measuring and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 5687–5711. Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, Sihan Zhao, Lauren Hong, Runchu Tian, Ruobing Xie, Jie Zhou, Mark Gerstein, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2024. ToolLLM: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world APIs. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Qwen Team. 2024. Qwen2.5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15115 .Hannah Rashkin, Vitaly Nikolaev, Matthew Lamm, Lora Aroyo, Michael Collins, Dipanjan Das, Slav Petrov, Gaurav Singh Tomar, Iulia Turc, and David Reitter. 2023. Measuring attribution in natural lan-guage generation models. Computational Linguistics ,49(4):777–840. Jon Saad-Falcon, Omar Khattab, Christopher Potts, and Matei Zaharia. 2024. ARES: An automated evalua-tion framework for retrieval-augmented generation systems. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics .Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dess `ı, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettle-moyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems .Huatong Song, Jinhao Jiang, Yingqian Min, Jie Chen, Zhipeng Chen, Wayne Xin Zhao, Lei Fang, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2025. R1-Searcher: Incentivizing the search capability in LLMs via reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05592 .Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. 2022. MuSiQue: Multi-hop questions via single-hop question composition. 

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 10:539–554. Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. 2023. Interleaving retrieval with chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledge-intensive multi-step questions. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics , pages 10014–10037. Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In 

International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Ziliang Wang, Kang An, Xuhui Zheng, Faqiang Qian, Weikun Zhang, Cijun Ouyang, Jialu Cai, Yuhang Wang, and Yichao Wu. 2025. Erase to im-prove: Erasable reinforcement learning for search-augmented LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.00861 .Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompt-ing elicits reasoning in large language models. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-ric Cistac, Tim Rault, R ´emi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. 2020. Transform-ers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. In 

Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 38–45. Shi-Qi Yan, Jia-Chen Gu, Yun Zhu, and Zhen-Hua Ling. 2024. Corrective retrieval augmented generation. In 

First Conference on Language Modeling .Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Ben-gio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christopher D. Manning. 2018. HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answer-ing. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Em-pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 2369–2380. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Ori Yoran, Tomer Wolfson, Ori Ram, and Jonathan Berant. 2024. Making retrieval-augmented language models robust to irrelevant context. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang, Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Junyang Lin, Fei Huang, and Jingren Zhou. 2025. Qwen3 embedding: Advancing text embedding and reranking through foundation models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05176 .Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems, Datasets and Benchmarks Track .A Prompts and Tool Definitions 

For reproducibility, this appendix records the verba-tim agent system prompt, the R EAD -G ATE correc-tive hints, the tool schemas, and the judge prompt used in all experiments. Question wording and gold annotations are inherited from each dataset’s release. 

A.1 Agent System Prompt 

The following prompt is used for both the no-READ -G ATE and the R EAD -G ATE conditions on all main cells: 

You are a question-answering assistant with access to a corpus through hybrid retrieval tools. ## Available Tools - search(query, k) : Hybrid (BM25 + dense) retrieval. Returns top-k chunk IDs with the 5 most query-relevant sentences as snippets. Snippets are NOT the full chunk --- use ‘read’ for full context. Snippet overlap across calls signals the index has converged on this query intent; reword or pivot. - read(evidence id) : Read the full content of a specific chunk. ## Strategy Work iteratively: search → read → evaluate 

→ search → read → . . . → answer. 

Never re-issue a near-duplicate query. If a search returned poor or repeated results, do ONE of: (a) reword with different surface forms, (b) add a discriminating entity/date/number from prior results, (c) decompose into a narrower sub-question, (d) stop searching and answer from what you have. 

Multi-hop discipline. If the question chains two facts, do NOT search the full composed question. Use a hop-1 search to identify the bridge entity, read, extract entity, then hop-2 search using the bridge entity. Single-hop questions should be answered in one search+read whenever possible. ## When Answering - Before answering, you MUST ‘read’ at least one chunk whose snippet directly supports the answer. Snippets alone are insufficient evidence. Exception: if the snippet contains the literal extractive answer span and matches the question entity exactly, you may answer without ‘read’. - Ground your response in the retrieved chunks. Cite the specific chunks that support your answer. - Stop when: you have read evidence that uniquely answers the question, OR two reformulations in a row produced no new useful evidence. 

The strict-prompt control replaces the snippet exception with: “Before answering, you MUST ‘read’ at least one chunk whose text directly sup-ports the answer. Snippets alone are never suffi-cient evidence. Do not answer until at least one read(evidence id) call has succeeded.” 

A.2 Read-Gate Corrective Hints 

The main R EAD -G ATE condition used throughout the paper triggers a single environment-level check: the agent emits a final action with read count =0. The offending action is rejected, the read-before-final hint below is appended to the next observa-tion, and the loop resumes without modifying any other prompt component. We additionally imple-ment a stricter hint that triggers when the agent issues an action other than read immediately af-ter a search call without inspecting any returned chunk (read-after-search); this hint is not part of the main R EAD -G ATE condition and is not separately ablated with its own reported numbers here, but it is available within the same corrective-hint frame-work that motivates the broader family of stronger procedural gates evaluated in Appendix F. 

Read-before-final hint (main R EAD -G ATE ). 

You attempted to answer before reading any evidence. You MUST call read(evidence id) on a promising chunk before giving the final answer. 

Read-after-search hint (implemented, not used in main R EAD -G ATE ). 

Your last search returned candidate chunks but you have not read any of them yet. You MUST call read(evidence id) on at least one of the most recently returned chunk IDs before answering or issuing another search. 

A.3 Tool Schemas 

The two-tool agent uses the following JSON tool schemas. search performs reciprocal-rank fusion over BM25 and a 0.6B dense retriever with top-

k = 5 returned to the agent and an internal fusion 

k = 60 . read returns the full chunk text by ID. 

{ "name": "search", "parameters": { "query": string, "k": integer (default 5) } } { "name": "read", "parameters": {

"evidence id": string } } 

A.4 Judge Prompt 

We score answers with a fixed gpt-5-mini judge at temperature 0.0. The judge receives the ques-tion, gold reference, and predicted answer, and returns a single JSON object {"correct": bool, "rationale": str }. The judge instruction is: 

You are a strict evaluator of question-answering systems. Given a question, a system-predicted answer, and a reference answer, decide whether the prediction conveys the same factual answer as the reference. Reply with a single JSON object: 

{"correct": true |false, "rationale": "..." }.Be conservative: numeric/extractive answers require exact factual match; abstractive answers require all key facts to be present. Minor wording differences are OK; missing facts or different facts are NOT OK. 

The judge runs on the question + gold + predicted-answer triple only and does not see re-trieved chunks, system identity, or run metadata. 

B Read-Gate Operational Details 

B.1 Read-Gate Overhead 

Table 6 reports the observable overhead of R EAD -GATE on the full minimal-reasoning cells. Correc-tions/Q counts rejected actions that consumed a loop without an executed tool call, after subtracting the final answer turn; this inferred count is zero for all matched no-gate cells. 

B.2 Read-Chunk Rank Distribution Under READ -G ATE 

Figure 4 reports the rank distribution of read events under the R EAD -G ATE (V5) condition and under the voluntary policy (V4) on the same gpt-5-mini minimal backbone. Both conditions are dominated by rank-1 reads, supporting the §5.2 claim that READ -G ATE enforces that a read happens rather than which chunk gets read. Quantitatively, when R EAD -G ATE forces a read after blocking a finalization attempt, the agent picks the rank-1 retrieval result in 50 .0% of terminal-read events and a top-2 chunk in roughly 64% ; 94% of forced reads on gold-annotated datasets (HotpotQA + 2WikiMultiHopQA) land on a gold-supporting chunk. Without R EAD -G ATE , the rank-1 share is 60 .0% on the same backbone — comparable, slightly higher. The agent’s chunk choice is there-fore already rank-1-dominated and is not changed materially by the gate. 

Figure 4: Distribution of read-chunk rank under R EAD -GATE (V5) and voluntary policy (V4), gpt-5-mini mini-mal backbone. Rank-1 dominance is largely backbone behavior, not gate-induced. 

B.3 Contain-Acc Check 

Table 7 reports Contain-Acc alongside LLM-Acc for the main minimal-reasoning cells. Contain-Acc is a string-containment secondary metric and is less semantically flexible than the LLM judge, but it moves in the same direction as LLM-Acc under READ -G ATE on all three datasets. 

Table 7: LLM-Acc and Contain-Acc for the main gpt-5-mini minimal cells; R EAD -G ATE rows bolded. 

Dataset Condition LLM-Acc Contain-Acc HotpotQA No gate 79.6 76.8 HotpotQA READ -G ATE 82.8 80.1 

2Wiki No gate 64.4 72.3 2Wiki READ -G ATE 69.7 75.9 

MuSiQue No gate 34.2 32.8 MuSiQue READ -G ATE 43.6 41.3 

B.4 Conditional Read-Gate Benefit 

Figure 5 visualizes the conditional benefit of READ -G ATE corresponding to Table 3 in the main text: across datasets, R EAD -G ATE ’s accuracy gain grows with residual discipline error. 10 20 30 40 50 

> residual discipline error before RG (%)
> 7.5
> 5.0
> 2.5
> 0.0
> 2.5
> 5.0
> 7.5
> 10.0
> RG gain in LLM-Acc (points)
> HotpotQA
> 2WikiMultiHopQA
> MuSiQue
> minimal
> medium

Figure 5: Conditional benefit of R EAD -G ATE . Each dataset contributes minimal- and medium-reasoning cells connected by a dashed arrow; gains grow with residual discipline error. Medium cells use n = 100 

matched ablations (boundary evidence only). 

B.5 Cost–Accuracy Trade-off 

Table 8 reports the cost–accuracy trade-off summa-rized in §5.6: adding R EAD -G ATE to gpt-5-mini at minimal reasoning closes 20 –24% of the LLM-Acc gap to gpt-5-mini at medium reasoning, without changing model weights or the reasoning budget. The corresponding read/loop overhead profile is in Table 6. Table 6: Deployment-relevant overhead for the main gpt-5-mini minimal cells. Ret. toks/Q counts retrieved evidence tokens rather than total API tokens. Corrections/Q is inferred from loop turns that correspond to rejected actions rather than executed tools. 

Dataset Condition Reads/Q Loops/Q Corrections/Q Ret. toks/Q LLM-Acc HotpotQA No gate 0.81 3.07 0.00 8,227 79.6 HotpotQA READ -G ATE 1.03 3.63 0.25 9,011 82.8 2Wiki No gate 0.77 3.54 0.00 12,721 64.4 2Wiki READ -G ATE 1.06 4.32 0.29 14,783 69.7 MuSiQue No gate 0.35 2.90 0.00 9,711 34.2 MuSiQue READ -G ATE 1.00 4.97 0.89 14,192 43.6 

Table 8: READ -G ATE vs. medium reasoning within the two-tool architecture (within-architecture trade-off; not vs. best system overall). Adding R EAD -G ATE at minimal reasoning (shaded row) closes 20 –24% of the LLM-Acc gap. † Medium-reasoning rows are n = 100 

matched ablations paired with the R EAD -G ATE medium ablation; others n = 1 ,000 . The same no-R EAD -G ATE 

system’s full n = 1 ,000 cell mean is 90.8/88.8/67.1 (Appendix M), consistent with this n = 100 subsample. 

Configuration HotpotQA 2Wiki MuSiQue 5-mini-min 79.6 64.4 34.2 

5-mini-min + R EAD -G ATE 82.8 69.7 43.6 

gap-closing % 20.8 20.7 23.6 5-mini-med (target) † 95.0 90.0 74.0 

C Mechanism Ablation Details 

Table 9 reports the per-arm overhead of the three-arm mechanism ablation summarized in §5.4, across all three datasets (seed=42). All three arms use gpt-5-mini at minimal reason-ing effort, gpt-5-mini judge, max loops=10, and max token budget=128k. The error rate (records with an error field) is 0.0% in all nine cells. 

Table 9: Per-arm overhead for the three-arm mechanism ablation across three datasets. The ctx-inject arm per-forms the same trigger detection as R EAD -G ATE but appends the rank-1 chunk text as a user -role observa-tion instead of forcing a read tool call.                                                    

> Dataset Arm LLM-Acc Reads/Q CtxInj/Q Loops/Q Cost/Q HotpotQA (i) no-R EAD -G ATE 79.6 0.81 —3.07 $0.0052 (ii) R EAD -G ATE 82.8 1.03 —3.63 $0.0020 (iii) ctx-inject 79.5 0.85 0.41 3.47 $0.0019 2Wiki (i) no-R EAD -G ATE 64.4 0.77 —3.54 $0.0082 (ii) R EAD -G ATE 69.7 1.06 —4.32 $0.0054 (iii) ctx-inject 57.0 0.74 0.76 4.00 $0.0045 MuSiQue (i) no-R EAD -G ATE 34.2 0.35 —2.90 $0.0057 (ii) R EAD -G ATE 43.6 1.00 —4.97 $0.0088 (iii) ctx-inject 38.1 0.47 0.96 3.87 $0.0042

Per-arm McNemar tests and effect sizes. 

Across the three paired samples, the R EAD -G ATE –vs–no-R EAD -G ATE contrast (arm (ii) vs (i)) is highly significant on every dataset: +3 .2 pp on HotpotQA (paired bootstrap [+2 .0, +4 .5] ;exact two-sided McNemar p = 1.9×10 −7), 

+5 .3 pp on 2WikiMultiHopQA ([+3 .7, +6 .9] ;

p = 3.2×10 −11 ), and +9 .4 pp on MuSiQue ([+7 .2, +11 .6] ; p = 2 .3×10 −21 ). The ctx-inject– vs–no-R EAD -G ATE contrast (arm (iii) vs (i)) is 

−0.1 pp on HotpotQA ( [−1.9, +1 .7] ; p = 1 .0), 

−7.4 pp on 2Wiki ( [−9.5, −5.4] ; p = 8 .4×10 −9), and +3 .9 pp on MuSiQue ( [+1 .7, +6 .1] ; p =0.003 ). The direct (iii) vs (ii) contrast favors READ -G ATE on every dataset (HotpotQA b =20 ctx-wins, c = 53 READ -G ATE -wins, exact 

p = 0 .000142 ; 2Wiki b = 27 , c = 154 , p =8.5×10 −23 ; MuSiQue b = 49 , c = 104 , p =1.0×10 −5). Delivering the same chunk text with-out the read action therefore recovers at most a minority of R EAD -G ATE ’s gain (point estimate 

+3 .9 pp on MuSiQue vs R EAD -G ATE ’s +9 .4 pp), and on 2Wiki it is substantially net-negative (ctx-inject is 7.4 pp worse than no-R EAD -G ATE ). 

Disagreement composition. On the paired HotpotQA sample, arm (iii) and arm (ii) disagree on 73 trajectories: arm (ii) is correct and arm (iii) is wrong on 53 (73% ), and arm (iii) is correct and arm (ii) is wrong on 20 (27% ). The deflection-pattern rate (final answers containing conversational hedges such as “thanks” , “do you want me to re-evaluate” , “please specify” ) is 21 /53 = 40% in arm-(iii)-wrong responses on these disagreement cases, and 0/53 = 0% in the corresponding arm-(ii)-correct responses. A representative case is HotpotQA 5a84e0a45542991dd0999e11 

(“Which is farther north, Steel Venom or Wicked Twister?” ): under R EAD -G ATE , the agent reads chunk 29 and answers “Wicked Twister” correctly; under ctx-inject, the agent receives the identical chunk-29 text in its message history and replies 

“Thanks — I’ve noted that additional context for chunk 29. Do you want me to re-evaluate . . . ?” ,never committing to an answer. A second case (5a7c8a3b55429935c91b5204 ) shows the oppo-site direction — ctx-inject succeeds on a question READ -G ATE got wrong — and contributes to the 

20 ctx-wins. Full case study and analysis script in 

revision analysis/r6 context injection.md .

C.1 Channel-vs-Action Decomposition (Four-Arm Probe) 

The three-arm ablation above delivers ctx-inject text as a user -role observation, leaving open whether READ -G ATE ’s advantage reflects the 

tool -role delivery channel or the self-issued read 

action itself. We add a fourth arm on MuSiQue (n = 500 , gpt-5-mini minimal, same paired ques-tion IDs, seed 42) that injects the identical rank-1 chunk text as a fabricated tool -role response (a synthetic read tool-call/result pair) without the agent issuing the corresponding action (Table 10).                        

> Table 10: Four-arm channel-vs-action probe (MuSiQue, gpt-5-mini minimal, paired n= 500 , seed 42). ∆is LLM-Acc relative to no-R EAD -G ATE (34.8).
> Arm LLM-Acc ∆95% CI no-R EAD -G ATE 34.8 ——ctx-inject (user-role) 39.2 +4 .4[+0 .8,+7 .8]
> ctx-inject (tool-role) 40.0 +5 .2[+2 .4,+8 .8]
> READ -G ATE 43.0 +8.2[+4 .6,+11 .6]

Channel alone (tool-role vs. user-role injection, neither self-issued) accounts for +5 .2 − 4.4 = +0 .8 pp, with heavily overlapping CIs — not signif-icant. The self-issued read action (R EAD -G ATE vs. tool-inject, same channel) adds a further +3 .0 pp. READ -G ATE ’s advantage is therefore most consis-tent with the agent committing to a self-issued read action rather than with the tool -role delivery chan-nel — an action-commitment interpretation that these controls support but do not conclusively iso-late — refining, rather than contradicting, the three-arm result above: forced context in either chan-nel recovers at most about half of R EAD -G ATE ’s gain, and channel choice is not the active ingredi-ent. This probe uses a single dataset and backbone (MuSiQue was chosen for its large R EAD -G ATE 

headroom); the three-arm result across all three datasets (Table 2) remains the primary mechanism evidence. 

D Robustness Details 

This appendix expands the robustness checks sum-marized in §5.6. 

Threshold and priority. Varying the low-evidence entity-coverage threshold from 0.6 to 0.9 barely changes minimal-reasoning discipline rates: HotpotQA ranges from 12.4–13.3%, 2Wiki-MultiHopQA from 21.9–22.1%, and MuSiQue from 56.9–57.0%. Changing the priority order changes absolute subtype counts, but a strict no-read-only lower bound preserves the same minimal-reasoning hump (HotpotQA 9.3%, 2WikiMulti-HopQA 15.4%, MuSiQue 51.5%). Because the fine-grained subtype boundaries depend on the entity-coverage threshold, we treat them as approx-imate and base the H1 overlap result on the coarser binary discipline indicator, whose cross-extractor agreement we quantify next. 

Extractor robustness for the discipline/post-gold-read overlap. Table 11 gives the 2 ×4bucket shares over the 3,807 wrong cases under regex and spaCy en core web sm entity extractors. The two extractors agree on the binary discipline in-dicator at Cohen’s κ = 0 .628 (observed agreement 

82 .1% ; expected 52 .0% ). The H1 conclusion is not the precise value of any single share but the qualita-tive two-axis structure, and that structure is invari-ant to extractor choice: under both extractors the both-trigger overlap stays in a tight [11 .2% , 13 .1%] 

band—far below the 60% level at which the two axes would collapse into one—and the discipline-only share exceeds the post-gold-read-only share by more than two to one. The residual extractor disagreement is concentrated in borderline cover-age cases near the 0.8 threshold; because spaCy and regex shift such cases in the same direction (spaCy raises both the discipline-only and both-trigger shares), the rank order and the sub-threshold overlap are preserved rather than reshuffled.                            

> Table 11: Multi-label buckets over the 3,807 wrong cases, by entity extractor (regex /spaCy
> en core web sm ). Cohen’s κ= 0 .628 .
> Extractor disc-only post-only both neither regex 46.5% 21.4% 11.2% 20.9% spaCy 50.2% 19.5% 13.1% 17.2%

Bootstrap intervals. We compute paired boot-strap 95% CIs over question IDs (1,000 itera-tions, seed 42). The minimal-reasoning R EAD -GATE accuracy gains exclude zero on all three datasets: HotpotQA +3 .2 pp [+2 .0, +4 .5] , 2Wiki-MultiHopQA +5 .3 pp [+3 .8, +6 .9] , MuSiQue 

+9 .4 pp [+7 .5, +11 .5] . Bootstrap estimates for the induced-read contrast on the zero-read sub-set are consistent with the point estimates in Ta-ble 1: HotpotQA +14 .7 pp [+9 .2, +20 .2] , 2Wiki-MultiHopQA +20 .1 pp [+14 .4, +25 .4] , MuSiQue 

+14 .4 pp [+11 .5, +17 .3] . The Gemini thinking-budget paired effect is −4.4 pp [−7.3, −1.3] .

Stratified label permutation. The label-permutation test reported in §5.5 uses a within-cell-stratified null draw over all 12,000 trajectories; this preserves cell-level marginals while ran-domizing the discipline / post-gold-read label assignment. The observed statistic exceeds every one of the 10,000 permutation samples, giving empirical p < 10 −4 that is robust to cell-marginal differences. 

Multiple-testing adjustment. We apply Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) FDR and Bonferroni corrections across the 11 tests supporting Ta-ble 4: three R EAD -G ATE main effects ( Pdisc , Ppost 

marginal, correctness), six effort contrasts (min and med vs. gpt-4o-mini, on Pdisc /Ppost /correctness), the effort ×axis interaction reported in Table 4, and the label-permutation exchangeability test. Nine GLM-based tests have original p < 10 −10 

(BH q and Bonferroni p both < 10 −10 ); effort (min vs. 4o) → Ppost has p < 10 −4 (adjusted similarly); the permutation test reaches its 10,000-sample resolution limit ( p < 10 −4; Bonferroni 

p = 0 .0011 ). All 11 survive both corrections at 

α = 0 .05 . Surviving FDR is necessary but not sufficient: the marginal R EAD -G ATE → Ppost OR is significant after correction yet mechanically exposure-confounded, so the within-strata row in Table 4 is the appropriate behavioral estimate (R-2). 

D.1 Cross-Family Generalization (Qwen2.5) 

The main H2 result (§5.3) is established on the Ope-nAI controller family. As a generalization check, we run the same two-tool interface, retrieval index, top-k, and loop budget with open-weight Qwen2.5-Instruct controllers (Qwen Team, 2024) (3B and 7B on all three datasets, plus 14B on HotpotQA; gpt-5-mini judge; matched n = 200 per cell, R EAD -GATE on/off). Table 12 reports Edisc and the paired READ -G ATE ∆ for each cell. 

Table 12: Qwen2.5 cross-family cells (matched n =200 , gpt-5-mini judge). Edisc is the no-R EAD -G ATE 

discipline-failure rate; ∆ READ -G ATE is the paired LLM-Acc change. Only musique-3B is individually significant at this sample size.                                                   

> Model Dataset Edisc (%) ∆READ -G ATE 95% CI McNemar p
> 3B HotpotQA 51.0 −2.0[−8.0,+4 .0] 0.627 7B HotpotQA 10.5 −1.0[−4.5,+2 .5] 0.774 14B HotpotQA 31.5 −2.5[−8.0,+2 .5] 0.442 3B 2Wiki 78.0 +1 .5[−4.0,+7 .5] 0.743 7B 2Wiki 17.5 −2.0[−8.0,+3 .5] 0.597 3B MuSiQue 74.0 +6.0[+1 .0,+11 .5] 0.043
> 7B MuSiQue 19.5 +1 .0[−4.0,+6 .0] 0.845

Across the 7 cells, Edisc and ∆ READ -G ATE 

correlate at Pearson r = +0 .629 (Spearman 

ρ = 0 .393 ), close to the OpenAI-family value of 

+0 .728 reported in §5.3: high-Edisc cells (musique-3B, 2wiki-3B) get the largest R EAD -G ATE gains, and low-Edisc cells cluster near zero or negative, reproducing the same qualitative dose-response shape on an independent model family. This is a direction, not a power, result. At 

n = 200 /cell most individual cells are not indepen-dently significant; only musique-3B is ( +6 .0 pp 

[+1 .0, +11 .5] , p = 0.043 ), and all three Hot-potQA cells are flat or slightly negative regardless of model size. The claim this table supports is narrow: the framework’s structural relationship —READ -G ATE ’s gain scales with residual discipline error — generalizes across model families. It is not a claim that R EAD -G ATE helps uniformly; on this family, as on the OpenAI family’s medium-reasoning cells, low-Edisc operating points show no benefit or a small cost. 

E Gemini Representative Trace and Break Decomposition 

Break decomposition. The break decomposition is consistent across both datasets: roughly half of the breaks are direct thinking-caused zero-read transitions (HotpotQA 41 .9% , 2Wiki 50 .5% ), and roughly half retain the same read count but produce a different wrong answer (HotpotQA 50 .0% , 2Wiki 

45 .5% ). The 2Wiki effect is in fact stronger than on HotpotQA, with a four-fold larger zero-read shift, suggesting the failure mode is robust rather than dataset-specific within Wikipedia-style multi-hop QA. Headline zero-read shifts: HotpotQA 

52 .3% → 58 .0% (+5 .7 pp); 2WikiMultiHopQA 

40 .8% → 65 .6% (+24 .8 pp). Truncation artifact. A subset of the same-read breaks on 2Wiki are mid-sentence trun-cations driven by a thinking budget ×

max output tokens interaction at the API surface, rather than evidence-skipping; the headline zero-read transition rate ( 50 .5% of breaks) is unaffected by this artifact. 

Representative trace. A representative Gemini break is the question “What is the genus of the viral disease that has symptoms such as fever, chills, loss of appetite, nausea, muscle pains, and headaches, and has a chance of causing liver damage?” (gold answer: Flavivirus ). With thinking disabled, the agent searches, expands a chunk that links yellow-fever symptoms to the genus, and answers Fla-vivirus correctly (one read, three loops). With a 1024-token thinking budget, the agent emits 1024 internal thinking tokens, searches once, and final-izes without any read action; the answer text re-states the symptoms but never names the genus. The trajectory is wrong despite spending more com-pute. 

F Procedural Gate-Family Probe 

READ -G ATE is the minimal procedural gate used in the main experiments. We also ran a small ap-pendix probe on broader deterministic gates to measure the trade-off from adding stronger run-time invariants (Table 13). The variants reuse the same saved detector checks: no read blocks fi-nal answers before any read; snippet additionally blocks answers whose entities appear only in search snippets; lowev additionally blocks final answers when read text has low question-entity coverage; 

full adds a format-mismatch check. These vari-ants use rules-only corrective hints and no learned controller. The result supports the conservative main de-sign choice. As Figure 6 makes visible, a snippet-only extension is relatively stable, but low-evidence and format gates introduce a stronger precision– intervention trade-off. We therefore use R EAD -GATE as the main intervention: it is the weak-est runtime invariant that directly targets pre-evidence termination without adding heuristic cov-erage thresholds or a learned controller. 

G Entity-Coverage Labeling 

The discipline subtypes snippet-only final 

and low-evidence final require detecting whether question-side named entities appear in retrieved snippets and read chunks (§3.2). We use a deterministic matching pipeline. When spaCy is available, we run the en core web sm 

pipeline on the question, retrieved snippets, and read chunks, and treat its named-entity spans as coverage candidates. When spaCy is unavailable or returns no spans, we fall back to a regex that captures capitalized multi-word phrases ([A-Z][A-Za-z0-9.-]+(?: \s[A-Z][A-Za-z0-9.-]+)* )and standalone numeric tokens, which together cover proper-noun answer entities and date or count answers common in HotpotQA / 2WikiMul-tiHopQA / MuSiQue. Matching is case-insensitive over the union of all question entities; an entity is covered if any of its surface forms appears verbatim in the candidate text. Coverage rate is the fraction of question entities matched in read chunks; a trajectory is labeled low-evidence final 

when this rate falls below 0.8. Because subtype assignment depends on this coverage threshold, the fine-grained snippet-only /low-evidence 

split is approximate; the H1 overlap analysis in Appendix D therefore rests on the coarser binary discipline indicator, on which the two extractor paths agree at Cohen’s κ = 0 .628 .

G.1 Entity-Matcher Validation 

We validate the regex entity matcher against an author-verified, hand-labeled sample ( n = 60 : 30 questions and 30 gold reference answers, stratified across HotpotQA and 2WikiMultiHopQA; every label reviewed by an author). Table 14 reports pre-cision, recall, and F1 under contains-match, the same matching rule the discipline detector uses operationally. Precision is 1.000 (no false posi-tives among 69 predicted entities; 95% Wilson CI 

[0 .947 , 1.000] ); the recall gap ( 0.734 overall) is concentrated almost entirely in single-token enti-ties (recall 0.148 ), which the regex cannot match by construction (it requires ≥ 2 consecutive cap-italized tokens), versus 0.966 recall on the multi-word entities it targets. Because the matcher pro-duced no spurious entity on this sample, the re-ported discipline-failure rates are a conservative lower bound rather than an inflated estimate. Read-Gate +snippet +lowev full          

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> Accuracy (%)
> 82 82 85 81
> HotpotQA
> Read-Gate +snippet +lowev full
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> Accuracy (%)  64 67 65 64
> 2WikiMultiHopQA
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> 3.0
> Corrections/Q
> 0.00
> 0.46
> 2.07 2.13
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> 3.0
> Corrections/Q
> 0.00
> 0.84
> 2.18
> 2.63

Figure 6: Precision–intervention trade-off across gate variants. Bars: LLM-Acc; lines: Corrections/Q. +snippet 

stays below 1 Corr./Q with neutral-to-positive accuracy; +lowev and full exceed 2 Corr./Q for accuracy within ±4

pts of R EAD -G ATE . Matched n = 100 .Table 13: Gate-family probe on matched n = 100 samples (smaller than main-cell tables 6–7). Corr./Q is mean interventions per question; Net vs. R EAD -G ATE is paired fixes minus breaks. Broader gates help on some cells but are intervention-heavy and dataset-sensitive. 

Dataset Variant Acc Zero-read Corr./Q Net vs. R EAD -G ATE 

HotpotQA READ -G ATE (n = 100 ) 82.0 0.0 0.00 –HotpotQA no-read + snippet 82.0 0.0 0.46 0

HotpotQA no-read + lowev 85.0 0.0 2.07 +3 

HotpotQA full 81.0 0.0 2.13 −1

2Wiki READ -G ATE (n = 100 ) 64.0 0.0 0.00 –2Wiki no-read + snippet 67.0 0.0 0.84 +3 

2Wiki no-read + lowev 65.0 0.0 2.18 +1 

2Wiki full 64.0 0.0 2.63 0

Table 14: Entity-matcher validation against an author-verified hand-labeled sample ( n = 60 ), contains-match. 

Precision Recall F1 Overall 1.000 0.734 0.847 Single-token entities — 0.148 —Multi-word entities — 0.966 —

H Discipline-Failure Subtype Decomposition 

Section 3.2 defines three discipline-failure sub-types: no-read final, snippet-only final, and low-evidence final. Table 15 reports their relative share, as a percentage of Edisc (the discipline failures in that cell), across the nine main dataset ×backbone cells. 

Table 15: Discipline-failure subtype shares (% of Edisc 

in that cell) across the nine main cells. 

Dataset Backbone nEdisc No-read Snippet-only Low-ev. HotpotQA 4o-mini 76 3.9 9.2 86.8 HotpotQA 5mini-min 133 69.9 1.5 28.6 HotpotQA 5mini-med 45 37.8 6.7 55.6 2Wiki 4o-mini 128 7.8 11.7 80.5 2Wiki 5mini-min 221 69.7 3.6 26.7 2Wiki 5mini-med 57 38.6 26.3 35.1 MuSiQue 4o-mini 278 15.5 17.6 66.9 MuSiQue 5mini-min 570 90.4 2.1 7.5 MuSiQue 5mini-med 217 56.7 22.6 20.7 

Pooled (1,725 discipline failures) 56.8 9.3 33.9 

Pooled over all nine cells, 56 .8% of discipline failures are strict no-read finals, 9.3% take the prompt-permitted snippet-only path, and 33 .9% 

are low-evidence. Because it requires no entity-matching heuristic, no-read is the primary, non-heuristic discipline signal; the two NER-based subtypes are secondary diagnostics whose relative weight is backbone-dependent (under gpt-4o-mini, which rarely skips reads outright, low-evidence dominates instead). Notably, 43 .2% of discipline failures ( 745 /1,725 ) occur despite read count ≥ 1(snippet-only plus low-evidence): R EAD -G ATE is framed as removing the zero-read floor, not as guar-anteeing adequate post-read inspection. 

I Zero-Read Provenance: Leakage vs. Unsupported Guesses 

Using the exact chunk IDs each search call re-turned (already logged per trajectory), we check whether a zero-read answer’s predicted entity is visible anywhere in the retrieved-but-unread search results, separating snippet leakage from genuinely unsupported guesses. 

Wrong zero-read answers. Pooled across the nine non-R EAD -G ATE main cells ( n = 980 wrong zero-read trajectories, 300-character snippet def-inition): 23 .7% (232) show snippet leakage (the predicted entity appears in a retrieved-but-unread chunk), 58 .5% (573) show no visible evidence (no trace of the guessed entity in anything retrieved), 

5.1% (50) never called search at all, and the re-maining 12 .8% (125) yield no informative entity in the predicted answer to match against (e.g., yes/no or clarification-style answers). The four categories are mutually exclusive and sum to 100% . Leakage is a real but minority contributor; most zero-read errors are unsupported guesses rather than surfaced-but-ignored answers. 

Correct zero-read answers. Restricted to the HotpotQA+2WikiMultiHopQA gold-annotated subset ( n = 282 classifiable correct zero-read cases), 19 .5% (55) show clean snippet leakage of the correct entity, 68 .4% (193) retrieved the gold-supporting chunk but without a verbatim entity match (a candidate for genuine cross-snippet synthesis without a full read), and 12 .1% (34) show no retrieved connection to gold evidence at all, consistent with parametric knowledge. Leakage is again a minority explanation, on both the wrong and correct sides. Critically, leakage is not the same question as whether a read action occurred: even when the an-swer surfaces in a snippet, finalizing without read-ing still skips the verification step our framework measures. 

Snippet-length sensitivity. Because “snippet” is an operational choice, Table 16 sweeps the char-prefix definition from 100 characters to the full chunk. Leakage rises with a more generous defi-nition, from 12 .2% to 60 .3% on wrong zero-read answers; we report the conservative 300-character definition ( 23 .7% ) as the headline, with this sweep reported as a bounded robustness range rather than a point estimate. 

Table 16: Snippet-length sensitivity sweep (char-prefix definition; 9 non-R EAD -G ATE main cells).             

> Snippet definition Wrong-ZR leak % Correct-ZR leak % 100 chars/chunk 12.2 8.7 300 chars/chunk (default) 23.7 21.1 600 chars/chunk 30.9 32.6 1200 chars/chunk 40.8 44.4 Full chunk 60.3 73.0

J Differential Intervention Visualization 

Figure 7 visualizes the intervention signatures in the (Pdisc , P post ) plane. The corresponding odds ratios and tests are reported in Table 4 in the main text. 

K Prompt-Only Control 

Table 17 reports the prompt-only baseline summa-rized in §5.2, extended to all three datasets (gpt-5-mini minimal, paired by question ID). The strict-prompt variant removes the snippet exception from the system prompt and explicitly forbids answering before a successful read, but uses no environment-level gate. Across the three datasets, the strict prompt reduces zero-read trajectories, but its ac-curacy effect is unreliable: +0 .0 pp on HotpotQA, 

−2.8 pp on 2WikiMultiHopQA, and +3 .2 pp on MuSiQue. READ -G ATE , by contrast, recovers 

+3 .2/+5 .3/+9 .4 pp on the same cells and reduces zero-read to ≤ 3.8% everywhere. On every dataset, the paired (RG vs strict-prompt) contrast is signifi-cant (McNemar p ≤ 0.005 ). 

Table 17: Prompt-only control across three datasets, gpt-5-mini minimal. Prompting reduces zero-read behavior on all datasets but does not match R EAD -G ATE ’s accu-racy gain on any dataset, and is net-negative on 2Wiki. McNemar p is the paired R EAD -G ATE vs strict-prompt LLM-Acc test.                                                       

> Dataset Condition Zero-read LLM-Acc vs strict p
> HotpotQA Original prompt 21.8% 79.6 —Strict prompt only 12.4% 79.6 —
> READ -G ATE 0.3% 82.8 0.0048
> 2Wiki Original prompt 26.4% 64.4 —Strict prompt only 20.7% 61.6 —
> READ -G ATE 0.3% 69.7 2.5×10 −7
> MuSiQue Original prompt 65.5% 34.2 —Strict prompt only 48.1% 37.4 —
> READ -G ATE 3.8% 43.6 1.5×10 −546810 12 14
> Pdisc discipline failure (%)
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> 14
> 16
> 18
> Ppost  post-gold-read error (%)
> HotpotQA
> 510 15 20 25
> Pdisc discipline failure (%)
> 7.5
> 10.0
> 12.5
> 15.0
> 17.5
> 20.0
> 22.5
> 25.0
> 2WikiMultiHopQA
> 20 30 40 50 60
> Pdisc discipline failure (%)
> n/a
> Ppost not measurable
> (no gold evidence annotations)
> MuSiQue
> 4o-mini 5mini-min 5mini-min + Read-Gate 5mini-med Model upgrade (4o-mini 5mini-min)

Figure 7: Differential intervention signatures in the (Pdisc , P post ) plane. R EAD -G ATE mainly reduces pre-evidence failures; higher effort moves both indicators with a different slope. Markers: 4o =gpt-4o-mini; min /med =gpt-5-mini minimal/medium; min+R EAD -G ATE =min with R EAD -G ATE . MuSiQue’s Ppost = 0 (no gold). 

L Cross-Judge Robustness Details 

This appendix expands the cross-judge robust-ness paragraph in §4.4. We re-judged n =450 stored (question, gold, prediction) triples (75 per cell across HotpotQA, 2WikiMulti-HopQA, and MuSiQue × no-R EAD -G ATE / R EAD -GATE ) under Gemini 2.5 Pro (temperature 0.0, 

thinking budget = 256 ), using the verbatim judge prompt in Appendix A.4. The sample is stratified by the gpt-5-mini-judge agreement land-scape between no-R EAD -G ATE and R EAD -G ATE 

on the same question (50% disagreement, 30% both-correct, 20% both-incorrect) so that the κ

statistic is informed by the cases most likely to flip across judges. Stratum-wise raw agreement is 0.952 on the disagreement stratum (228 judg-ments), 0.970 on both-correct (132), and 0.978 on both-incorrect (90). 

Per-cell κ and reweighted LLM-Acc. Ta-ble 18 reports Cohen’s κ alongside the stratum-reweighted Gemini LLM-Acc and its gap to the paper headline. All six cells fall in the “almost perfect” band ( κ ≥ 0.80 ); the reweighted Gemini estimates are within ±3.7 pp of the paper head-line on every cell. The largest gaps are uniform shifts across conditions that cancel in ∆ (Gem-ini HotpotQA ∆ = +3 .2, identical to the pa-per; Gemini 2Wiki ∆ = +7 .4 vs the paper’s 

+5 .3; Gemini MuSiQue ∆ = +7 .3 vs the pa-per’s +9 .4). The family-bias hypothesis would predict ∆Gemini ≪ ∆gpt5mini ; we observe direction-preserving and similar-magnitude ∆ across all three datasets. 

Disagreement case study. gpt-5-mini and Gem-ini 2.5 Pro disagree on 17/450 cases (3.8%). The pattern is bidirectional: a small share where Gemini 

Table 18: Cross-judge agreement and stratum-reweighted LLM-Acc on the n = 450 sample. “Paper” is gpt-5-mini on the full n = 1000 cell; “Gemini-rw” is the Horvitz–Thompson-reweighted Gemini 2.5 Pro estimate on the 75-per-cell sample. 

Cell κ Paper Gemini-rw Gap HotpotQA, no-R EAD -G ATE 0.940 79.6 75.9 −3.7

HotpotQA, R EAD -G ATE 0.932 82.8 79.1 −3.7

2Wiki, no-R EAD -G ATE 0.886 64.4 63.6 −0.8

2Wiki, R EAD -G ATE 0.871 69.7 71.0 +1 .3

MuSiQue, no-R EAD -G ATE 0.970 34.2 34.2 0.0

MuSiQue, R EAD -G ATE 0.860 43.6 41.5 −2.1

Pooled (all 6) 0.924 — — —

∆ HotpotQA — +3 .2 +3 .2 0.0∆ 2Wiki — +5 .3 +7 .4 +2 .1∆ MuSiQue — +9 .4 +7 .3 −2.1

catches a subject-mismatch, internal contradiction, or logic inversion that gpt-5-mini missed; a similar share where gpt-5-mini correctly accepts a para-phrase or partial answer that Gemini penalizes on format strictness; the rest are genuinely borderline. A representative Gemini-catches case is the 2Wiki question “Where was the place of death of Bess Taffel’s husband?” , where the prediction confuses subject (gives Bess Taffel’s place of death, not her husband’s) but contains the token-matching “Los Angeles”; gpt-5-mini marks it correct, Gem-ini marks it incorrect. Such cases reflect a slight strictness difference, not a family-bias artifact: the disagreements are small in number, bidirectional, and do not concentrate on gpt-5-mini-family gener-ations. Full case study and reweighting derivation in revision analysis/r1b cross judge.md .

M Architecture × Backbone Comparison 

The runtime findings in the main text fix the agent interface. We now vary it, comparing the two-tool design against A-RAG’s three-tool hierarchical in-Table 19: Backbone-conditional interface effect. Two-tool interface vs. A-RAG’s three-tool hierarchical inter-face; ∆ is 2-tool minus A-RAG in LLM-Acc points; ∗

marks paired McNemar p < 0.05 . Same retrieval in-dex, top-k, loop budget, and judge throughout. † marks cells cited from Du et al. (2026); all other A-RAG cells (4o-mini, 5mini-min rows) are re-measured under our harness.                                         

> Backbone Dataset A-RAG 2-tool ∆
> 4o-mini HotpotQA 77.6 81.6 +4.0∗
> 4o-mini 2Wiki 53.8 70.1 +16 .3∗
> 4o-mini MuSiQue 41.4 46.6 +5.2∗
> 5mini-min HotpotQA 73.6 79.6 +6.0∗
> 5mini-min 2Wiki 67.5 64.4 −3.1
> 5mini-min MuSiQue 40.7 34.2 −6.5∗
> 5mini-med HotpotQA 94.5 †90.8 −3.7
> 5mini-med 2Wiki 89.7 †88.8 −0.9
> 5mini-med MuSiQue 74.1 †67.1 −7.0∗

terface (keyword search, semantic search, read) under the same index, top-k, loop budget, judge, and reasoning effort (Table 19). A-RAG numbers at gpt-5-mini medium are taken from Du et al. (2026); A-RAG at gpt-4o-mini and at gpt-5-mini minimal are our re-measurements under the same retrieval index, top-k, loop budget, judge, and protocol. The 2-tool 5mini-med row reports the full 

n = 1 ,000 no-R EAD -G ATE cell mean for this backbone. §5.3 additionally reports a matched 

n = 100 subsample of the same system, paired question-by-question with the R EAD -G ATE 

medium ablation, giving 95.0/90.0/74.0 on Hot-potQA/2Wiki/MuSiQue (Table 3) — a consistent measurement of the same no-R EAD -G ATE system on a different, smaller question subsample used for the paired R EAD -G ATE comparison, not a different system or a labeling error. The ordering is monotone in backbone strength. On gpt-4o-mini, the two-tool interface wins on all three datasets ( +4 .0, +16 .3, +5 .2, all paired-significant). On gpt-5-mini at minimal reasoning, the advantage holds on HotpotQA but reverses on 2WikiMultiHopQA and MuSiQue. On gpt-5-mini at medium reasoning, the hierarchical interface wins on all three datasets ( −3.7, −0.9, −7.0). Nei-ther architecture is universally better. A natural reading is that interface granularity trades decision burden against controllability: the two-tool interface folds the lexical-vs.-semantic choice into the environment via reciprocal-rank fu-sion, removing one decision axis from the model. A weaker controller benefits from the reduced bur-den; a stronger controller with more reasoning ef-fort can exploit the extra control axis when it can reliably route each subquery to a retrieval mode. This is complementary to the R EAD -G ATE result: both findings say the right agentic-RAG design is regime-dependent — simplified interface plus runtime gate at the low-cost operating point, hier-archical interface at the high-reasoning operating point — without changes to model weights or the retriever.