Title: Evoflux: Inference-Time Evolution of Executable Tool Workflows for Compact Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.12674v1

Published Time: Fri, 12 Jun 2026 00:13:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Evoflux: Inference-Time Evolution of Executable Tool Workflows for Compact Agents 

Kushal Raj Bhandari 1, Ling Yue 1, Ching-Yun Ko 2, Dhaval Patel 2,Shaowu Pan 1, Pin-Yu Chen 2*, Jianxi Gao 1*1 Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA  

> 2

IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598 USA 

Abstract 

Compact language models (LMs) reduce cost, latency, and deployment risk for tool agents. Yet MCP-style tool use requires more than iso-lated function calling: an agent must discover tools from live catalogs, satisfy schemas, pre-serve dependencies across intermediate outputs, and ground final responses in executed evi-dence. Small planners often generate plausible workflow graphs that fail under tool resolution, parameter validation, dependency tracking, or execution. We argue that this failure mode is poorly handled by small-corpus distillation. A few hundred teacher traces can teach workflow format, but rarely cover the recovery behav-ior needed to repair failed plans over chang-ing tool catalogs. We introduce Evoflux, an inference-time evolutionary search method that treats compact tool use as the repair of exe-cutable tool workflows. It evolves typed work-flow graphs through structured edits, execu-tion feedback, adaptive intensity, meta-guided redesign, and diversity pruning. On held-out MCP-Bench tasks spanning live MCP servers and 250 tools, Evoflux raises execution fea-sibility from roughly 3% to 17–24% across small planners. In contrast, SFT and SFT+DPO on the same search-mined data match, un-derperform, or collapse below zero-shot per-formance; ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) reaches higher peaks, but with higher variance and to-ken cost. These results show that execution-grounded search is more reliable under scarce teacher-trace budgets. Code is available at 

https://github.com/IBM/Evoflux .

1 Introduction 

Language models are increasingly deployed as agents that act through external tools rather than answer only from parametric knowledge. In this setting, success requires more than selecting a func-tion name or emitting a well-formed call. An agent    

> *Corresponding authors: pin-yu.chen@ibm.com, gaoj8@rpi.edu

must translate a user goal into an executable work-flow, recover relevant tools from a changing cata-log, satisfy tool schemas, preserve dependencies across intermediate outputs, and ground the final response in observed execution results. Tool use therefore becomes a workflow construction prob-lem (Yue et al., 2026): the model must build a small typed program whose steps can compile, execute, and carry evidence forward. The Model Context Protocol (MCP) offers a con-crete interface for this class of agents by standardiz-ing how models discover and call tools exposed by external servers. Tool-use benchmarks have accord-ingly moved from broad API and function-calling coverage in ToolBench (Qin et al., 2024) and Go-rilla (Gonzalez et al., 2024) toward longer-horizon tasks with realistic dependencies. MCP-Bench ad-vances this line through 28 live MCP servers and 

250 tools across finance, travel, scientific comput-ing, academic search, and other domains (Wang et al., 2026). Its tasks often omit explicit tool names and require fuzzy tool discovery, precise parameter grounding, multi-hop execution, and cross-domain orchestration. This benchmark, therefore, tests whether agents can construct reliable executable workflows rather than merely imitate tool-call for-mats. Compact language models in the 1.5B to 4Brange are attractive for such agents because they reduce serving cost, latency, and privacy exposure while supporting local or enterprise-controlled de-ployment (Belcak et al., 2025; Erdogan et al., 2024). These advantages matter when one user request triggers multiple model calls, tool invocations, and validation steps. Yet compact planners are brittle in exactly the dimensions that MCP-style work-flows stress. They emit malformed JSON, select unavailable tools, omit required arguments, break dependency links, and answer from prior knowl-edge rather than executed evidence (Patil et al., 2024; Gonzalez et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024). 1  

> arXiv:2606.12674v1 [cs.AI] 10 Jun 2026 Figure 1: Dynamic training and evaluation pipeline for Evoflux. A teacher model first generates and refines workflows through execution feedback, typed edits, and LLM-judge scores, producing traces and preference pairs for student training. At evaluation, Evoflux keeps the base small model in a dynamic repair loop that mutates, executes, scores, and selects workflow candidates, while distilled inference uses a trained student in a static one-pass setting.

Many failures are not obviously nonsensical in text: the generated graph can look plausible while failing under tool resolution, parameter validation, depen-dency tracking, or execution. A standard response is to distill stronger-agent behavior into the compact model. Supervised fine-tuning teaches output conventions and recurring action patterns (Chen et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2024), while preference optimization can sharpen contrast among plausible alternatives (Rafailov et al., 2023). Larger agent-distillation efforts rely on thousands to tens of thousands of trajectories: ToolLLM uses roughly 12 ,000 (Qin et al., 2024), xLAM curates roughly 60 ,000 (Zhang et al., 2025), and Agent-FLAN uses roughly 34 ,000 (Chen et al., 2024). This scale is difficult to reproduce when each MCP-Bench task requires teacher calls, live tool execu-tion, and judge evaluation. Under a budget of a few hundred traces, one-shot demonstrations mostly ex-pose successful surface forms; they do not cover the recovery process that repaired wrong tool choices, missing dependencies, weak grounding, or parame-ter mismatches. Catastrophic forgetting in narrow continual instruction tuning further suggests that small-corpus finetuning may carry downside risk for compact models (Luo et al., 2025). This paper studies the train-versus-search trade-off in that scarce-trace regime. Given the same small planner and the same search-mined supervi-sion budget, should compute be spent on weight updates, or on inference-time repair over the actual task, catalog, and execution environment? Test-time search provides one route around the data bottleneck by spending compute online. Prior work explores deliberate tree search (Yao et al., 2023a), scaling inference-time compute for reason-ing (Snell et al., 2025), and execution feedback for language agents (Shinn et al., 2023; Qiao et al., 2024). A related evolutionary line treats language models as semantic variation operators, from Fun-Search for program discovery (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024) to AlphaEvolve for coding-agent op-timization (Novikov et al., 2025), AdaEvolve for adaptive LLM-driven optimization (Cemri et al., 2026), and FlowEvo for self-evolving agents that co-evolve workflows and executable skills (Ren et al., 2026). These methods motivate using inference-time compute not just to sample more 2text, but to generate, execute, evaluate, and revise structured candidates. We introduce Evoflux, an inference-time evolu-tionary search procedure for compact tool-using agents. Evoflux represents plans as typed workflow graphs and evolves them through structured ed-its, execution feedback, adaptive intensity control, meta-guided redesign, and action-hash diversity pruning. The compact model acts as a proposal op-erator inside a bounded execution-and-repair loop rather than as a one-shot workflow generator. The method adapts ideas from evaluator-guided evolu-tionary search to workflow DAGs over live tool cat-alogs, while keeping a per-task fixed budget rather than claiming the global allocation layer of broader evolutionary systems. We evaluate zero-shot decoding, supervised fine-tuning on teacher traces, supervised finetuning followed by direct preference optimization, Re-Act, and Evoflux on identical held-out MCP-Bench tasks. All training baselines use the same realis-tic small-budget corpus, which lets us ask whether search-mined traces transfer better through model weights or through execution-time repair. The paper makes the following contributions. • We introduce Evoflux, an adaptive inference-time evolutionary procedure for small tool-using agents combining typed workflow edits, execution-grounded scoring, adaptive intensity control, meta-guided redesign, and action-hash diversity pruning. • We position compact MCP-style tool use as an ex-ecutable workflow repair problem, and evaluate whether scarce teacher traces are more effective as finetuning data or as search-time feedback. • Under this budget, inference-time search lifts held-out feasibility and score across small plan-ners, while SFT and SFT+DPO on the same tra-jectories either match, underperform, or collapse below the zero-shot baseline, quantifying an un-derreported risk of small-corpus finetuning on compact agents. 

2 Problem Setup 

We cast small tool-using agents as workflow plan-ners over a live execution environment. Each open-domain query arrives as a triple q = (x, T , E),where x is a natural language request, T catalogs the MCP servers and their exposed tools, and E is the stateful environment in which calls resolve. A workflow planner consumes this triple and emits a graph g that executes in E and satisfies x.The graph g carries typed structure throughout. It contains tool nodes, dependency edges, optional validator nodes, and a terminal output node. Every tool node binds a server identifier, a tool name, an input parameter assignment, and a set of upstream parents whose outputs feed its arguments. This representation pins down what a valid candidate must achieve. Its nodes resolve under T , its de-pendency edges preserve information across calls, its tool schemas accept the assigned parameters, and its terminal output satisfies x when executed end-to-end in E.Our objective departs from one-shot decoding. Rather than training a small planner pθ to emit a final workflow in a single pass, we target high-scoring workflows produced under a bounded inference-time search budget and treat training as a baseline configuration rather than a central commitment. We evaluate pθ across five deploy-ment regimes: direct zero-shot decoding, super-vised finetuning on teacher traces, supervised fine-tuning followed by direct preference optimization, ReAct-style sequential tool use, and Evoflux with-out weight updates. Execution-based task score on a held-out split adjudicates all five. We partition MCP-Bench into a search split 

Dsearch and a held-out evaluation split Deval .The search split underwrites prompt development, typed edit design, and the construction of any teacher trace or preference data. The evaluation split governs comparison among deployment con-figurations and never enters training or prompt tuning. We regard weight updates as beneficial only when they improve execution-based perfor-mance on Deval over the same smaller model run-ning inference-time evolution. This criterion tests whether training yields out-of-distribution work-flow competence rather than merely fitting the prompts, edits, traces, or preference data derived from Dsearch .

3 Method 

Overview. Evoflux is an adaptive evolutionary loop that searches for executable tool workflows at inference time. Given task q = (x, T , E), a planner P proposes a symbolic workflow. The can-didate builder compiles it into an executable graph, validates schemas, executes feasible candidates in 

E, and assigns a score. Search then improves the population through typed graph edits, evidence-conditioned mutation, and planner-guided redesign 3Algorithm 1 Adaptive workflow evolution for one task. Full procedure with planner retry, adaptive intensity, meta guidance, and action-hash pruning details in Algorithm 2.                                                                                                       

> Require: Task q, planner P, budget B, population cap K
> 1: c0←INIT CANDIDATE WITH RETRY (q, P )
> 2: P←{c0};f∗←f(c0);G←0;cd ←0
> 3: for t=1to Bdo
> 4: I←INTENSITY (G)
> 5: if G<τmand meta cooldown inactive then
> 6: cm←META GUIDANCE (P, q, P)
> 7: if cmfeasible then
> 8: (G, f ∗)←UPDATE G(G, f ∗, f (cm))
> 9: P←PRUNE (P∪{cm}, K )
> 10: end if
> 11: cd ←ROUNDED (γB )
> 12: end if
> 13: cd ←max (0,cd −1)
> 14: p←SELECT PARENT (P, I )
> 15: e←COLLECT EVIDENCE (p)
> 16: explore ∼BERNOULLI (I)
> 17: c′←MUTATE WITH RETRY (P, p, e, explore )
> 18: if ¬c′.feasible then
> 19: continue
> 20: end if
> 21: (G, f ∗)←UPDATE G(G, f ∗, f (c′))
> 22: P←PRUNE (P∪{c′}, K )
> 23: end for
> 24: return P

when local mutation stalls. Algorithm 1 gives the main per-task procedure. The full procedure, including initialization retry, mutation retry, growth updates, meta-cooldown, and action-hash pruning, appears in Algorithm 2. The algorithm maintains a bounded population P,the best observed score f ∗, and an adaptive growth statistic G. At each step, the current growth level determines the search intensity. Low growth in-creases exploratory mutation and may trigger meta guidance. High growth concentrates search around stronger candidates through tournament-style par-ent selection and evidence-conditioned repair. The method follows four design principles. Ed-its stay typed, keeping candidates inside the com-pilable workflow space. Candidates earn scores through execution rather than syntactic validity alone. Mutation consumes node-level failure ev-idence from execution traces, letting edits tar-get missing dependencies, invalid parameters, un-available tools, or malformed intermediate out-puts. Search histories retain candidate variants, execution outcomes, and failure evidence that a downstream pipeline converts into training exam-ples, while held-out execution performance re-mains the main criterion for comparing training and inference-time evolution. Implementation de-tails appear in Appendix A, and the SFT+DPO dataset construction is discussed in Appendix B. 

Candidate representation and construction. Acandidate c stores everything needed to evaluate one workflow variant. It contains the symbolic ac-tion graph proposed by the planner or produced by an edit, the compiled executable workflow, feasibil-ity metadata, execution logs, and judge scores. This structure lets Evoflux compare candidates by exe-cution outcome while still tracing each score back to concrete graph decisions such as tool choice, parameter grounding, and dependency structure. The procedure B UILD CANDIDATE converts a symbolic graph into an executable workflow. It parses the graph, resolves server and tool identi-fiers against the catalog T , validates parameters against tool schemas, checks graph acyclicity and dependency references, and executes the workflow when static checks succeed. Candidates that fail parsing, compilation, schema validation, depen-dency checks, or execution are marked infeasible and retain the corresponding error evidence. Initialization uses the same construction pipeline inside a bounded retry loop. The planner receives up to R attempts to produce the first feasible work-flow. After each failed attempt, the system extracts compiler, checker, or execution errors and returns them as context for the next planner call. This retry stage gives search a usable starting point with-out introducing a separate correction mechanism. Mutation reuses the same pattern when planner-proposed edits fail. 

Execution scoring. The scoring function f (c)

maps each candidate to a scalar execution score derived from the MCP-Bench LLMJ UDGE eval-uator (Wang et al., 2026). Infeasible candidates receive a score of 0. For each feasible candidate, we pass the task, final response, available tools, total execution rounds, and execution trace to the evaluator. We run the judge with stability testing enabled, invoking it five times per candidate with a freshly randomized prompt structure on each pass, shuffling the order of evaluation dimensions, subdi-mensions, and scoring criteria independently. The five resulting score sets are averaged per subdimen-sion before any further computation. Each pass scores six subdimensions on a 1 to 10 scale, cov-ering task fulfillment, grounding, tool appropriate-ness, parameter accuracy, dependency awareness, and parallelism and efficiency. We define f (c) as the arithmetic mean of these six scores. 4Figure 2: Left) Average initial score and average best score per query on the search split. Right) Token efficiency frontier on the search split 

This scalar score drives parent selection, growth updates, population pruning, and final candidate selection. We also log the six subdimension scores separately, allowing later analysis to dis-tinguish between task completion, grounding, tool choice, parameter accuracy, dependency handling, and efficiency. Evoflux therefore optimizes an execution-grounded aggregate score while preserv-ing the judge dimensions needed for failure analy-sis. For evaluation, we use openai/gpt-oss-20b 

for all models except for large models such as sonnet-4-5 and llama3-70b , where we use 

claude/sonnet-4.6 . This is to ensure that large models are scored properly and can be used to cre-ate a better workflow dataset (Appendix B). 

Typed edit language and execution evidence. 

Evoflux modifies workflows through a finite typed edit language that mirrors common MCP failure modes. Tool swaps replace a server or tool binding at a specified node, leaving dependency structure untouched, and address unavailable tools or poor semantic matches. Parameter edits revise argument values, add missing required fields, or bind an ar-gument to an upstream output, addressing schema errors and weak grounding. Tool insertion adds an evidence-gathering, transformation, or lookup step. Tool removal deletes redundant or harmful steps and reconnects downstream dependencies when the remaining graph permits it. Step reordering changes the dependency structure to repair prema-ture calls or missing intermediate objects. Valida-tor insertion adds checks for malformed, empty, or type-incompatible outputs. By constraining mu-tation to these operations, Evoflux avoids uncon-strained graph rewriting while still covering the main ways executable workflows fail. For each executed candidate, C OLLECT EVI - 

> DENCE

summarizes node-level behavior from com-piler messages, static checks, execution logs, and evaluator feedback. The evidence records whether each node resolved to an available tool, whether its parameters satisfied the schema, whether upstream values existed when consumed, whether execution succeeded, whether outputs were empty or mal-formed, and whether downstream nodes failed be-cause of that node. The evidence object also stores local score-relevant signals, including final-answer grounding failures and missing task requirements when the evaluator exposes them. Mutation uses this evidence to choose edit lo-cations and edit types. In exploitation mode, the planner receives a compressed context containing failing nodes, neighboring dependencies, observed errors, feasible operations, and a smaller diff from the current best candidate. In exploration mode, the system samples stacked random edits, weighted toward nodes with higher error rates. This de-sign gives search both targeted repair behavior and enough diversity to escape local workflow patterns. 

Adaptive intensity, meta guidance, and prun-ing. The controller tracks recent positive progress through a growth statistic G. For a new candidate with score f (c′), the algorithm computes the non-negative relative improvement over the best previ-ous score and updates G with an exponential mov-ing average of squared improvement. The resulting intensity 

I = Imin + Imax − Imin 

1 + √G + ε

increases when progress stalls and decreases when improvements accumulate. Intensity governs par-5ent selection and mutation style through two inde-pendent Bernoulli draws sharing probability I. The first draw selects the parent; a success samples uni-formly from the population for diversity, a failure runs a tournament among high-scoring candidates. The second draw chooses the mutation style; a suc-cess follows the exploratory path with compound random edits, a failure follows the exploitative path with evidence-conditioned planner edits. This con-troller makes search reactive to task-level progress rather than fixed across all tasks. Meta guidance supplies a higher-level redesign step when local mutation stops improving the pop-ulation. When G falls below threshold τm and the cooldown counter is inactive, the planner re-ceives the task, the current best candidate, and the three weakest population members, then proposes a revised candidate that must pass the same com-pilation, static checking, execution, and scoring pipeline as any other candidate. This intervention differs from local mutation in scope. It can replace a single-server path with a cross-server workflow, introduce a missing evidence stage, reorganize de-pendencies around an intermediate object, or sim-plify an overplanned graph. The cooldown fraction 

γ prevents repeated planner redesign from dominat-ing the evolutionary loop, leaving meta guidance as a sparse escape mechanism rather than an alternate solver. The population is capped at K candidates. After each feasible meta-guided or mutated candidate en-ters the population, P RUNE selects survivors using action-hash binning. Candidates are bucketed by a hash of their action structure, and survivors are chosen round-robin across buckets. This preserves high-scoring candidates while reducing collapse onto near-duplicate workflows. The final output is the surviving population, from which the evalua-tion uses the highest-scoring candidate. Evoflux turns workflow generation into an execution-driven refinement process. The planner supplies initial and repair proposals, while compi-lation, static checks, execution traces, and LLM-JUDGE scores determine which variants survive. Typed edits, adaptive intensity, and meta guidance move search between local repair and broader re-design while keeping candidates inside the space of executable MCP workflows. The resulting his-tories also support the training baselines, since the same workflow variants yield positive traces, hard negatives, and subskill-level evaluation signals. We next evaluate whether this search process improves compact tool-using agents beyond direct inference, supervised finetuning, and preference optimization on held-out MCP-Bench tasks. 

4 Results and Analysis 

4.1 Search Split 

We begin with the search split, where the goal is to inspect Evoflux’s behavior before evaluating held-out generalization. This split shows how often each planner reaches executable workflows, how much the evolutionary loop improves over the initial pro-posal, where the judge’s sub-dimensions change after search, and how score trades off against token cost. 

Initial generation versus search-discovered best. 

Figure 2 (left) compares the score of the initial workflow against the best workflow discovered for the same query. Evoflux improves every planner, but the magnitude of improvement varies sharply. 

sonnet-4-5 starts at 4.94 and reaches 6.26 , gain-ing 1.32 points. llama3-70b moves from 3.91 to 

5.25 , gaining 1.34 points. The largest absolute gain among compact planners comes from Qwen3.5-4B ,which rises from 1.44 to 3.35 .The relative gains reveal where search has the strongest effect. Qwen3.5-4B gains 132% over its initial score, gemma-4-E2B gains 90%, and 

SmolLM3-3B gains 74%. By contrast, sonnet-4-5 

gains 27% because its initial workflows already start at a higher score. This pattern suggests that search works best when the initial plan contains a recoverable structure. It can amplify weak but coherent workflows, yet it cannot fully rescue planners whose initial graphs provide little useful structure. DeepSeek-R1-Qwen-1.5B remains the lowest-scoring planner after search, reaching only 1.27. The smaller planners also remain below the stronger baselines in absolute score. None of the sub-4B smaller planners reaches the initial score of 

llama3-70b , and none approaches the post-search score of sonnet-4-5 . Evoflux narrows some gaps, especially for Qwen3.5-4B , but it does not erase the quality advantage of stronger planners. 

Token cost versus delivered score. Fig-ure 2 ( right ) compares average token use with the final score. The planners fall into three regimes. sonnet-4-5 and llama3-70b occupy the high-cost, high-score region. sonnet-4-5 spends roughly 140k tokens per query and reaches an 6Figure 3: Score distributions across stages for Llama-3.2-3B , Qwen3.5-4B , SmolLM3-3B , and  

> DeepSeek-R1-Qwen-1.5B on the validation split

average final score near 3.9. llama3-70b spends roughly 133k tokens and reaches about 3.35. These planners buy quality with a large inference budget. A smaller and more efficient group appears near the lower-left frontier. Nemotron-3-Nano-4B 

uses about 20k tokens for a score near 1.45. 

granite-4.0-h-micro and Qwen3.5-4B reach scores around 1.8 while using roughly 38k to 42k tokens. These planners deliver the strongest score per token among smaller options in this search set-ting. Several planners sit away from the frontier. 

gemma-4-E2B spends about 108k tokens for a score near 1.95, which makes it less attractive than smaller planners that reach similar scores at much lower cost. Phi-4-mini and llama3-3b spend roughly 68k to 75k tokens but achieve scores that cheaper, smaller planners match or exceed. 

DeepSeek-R1-Qwen-1.5B uses few tokens but also produces the lowest score; this is because it fails to plan properly, hence it defaults to the heuristic method. This accounting excludes the token consumption of the heuristic fallback path. When a planner fails to produce a usable workflow and the framework resorts to the heuristic method, we do not charge the heuristic path to the planner’s token total. The reported token-efficiency frontier should therefore be interpreted as model-planner cost rather than full-system cost for runs that invoke fallback be-havior. The search split, therefore, identifies asmall practical frontier. Nemotron-3-Nano-4B ,

granite-4.0-h-micro , and Qwen3.5-4B provide the strongest smaller tradeoffs, while llama3-70b 

and sonnet-4-5 remain the quality-focused choices. Extra token budget alone does not guar-antee better workflows, especially for mid-tier, smaller planners that spend more tokens without producing stronger execution outcomes. 

4.2 Validation Split 

The validation split tests whether the behav-ior observed during search transfers to held-out tasks. We compare the zero-shot initial work-flow, the best workflow found by Evoflux, the ReAct baseline (Yao et al., 2023b), and the trained checkpoints produced from search-derived traces. The comparison centers on four small plan-ners, Llama-3.2-3B , Qwen3.5-4B , SmolLM3-3B ,and DeepSeek-R1-Qwen-1.5B , and measures their score distributions, execution feasibility, and token costs across stages. 

Score distribution across stages. Figure 3 com-pares the score across validation-time and trained stages. Across the four compact planners, test-time search produces the strongest validation be-havior. Valid Best shifts execution success up-ward relative to Valid Init and to the trained check-points, showing that online exploration recovers executable workflows that the compact policies do not reliably internalize from the available supervi-sion. SFT and SFT+DPO remain close to Valid Init and, in some cases, trail it, suggesting that the teacher-trace budget provides insufficient cover-age for stable weight-level improvement on unseen queries. ReAct shows a sharper dependence on planner strength. On the stronger planner, Valid ReAct achieves the highest or near-highest exe-cution success, but its distribution is more spread out than Valid Best. This wider spread produces both high outliers and a longer lower tail. Evoflux therefore yields steadier outcomes, while ReAct trades predictability for occasional large gains. On the weaker planner, ReAct provides little improve-ment over Valid Init, indicating that extended tool-augmented trajectories can amplify drift when the base planner struggles with multi-step state track-ing. The deployment implication follows directly from the distributional shape. Valid Best offers the 7Figure 4: (Left) Prompt, (Middle) completion token use and (Right) execution success by stage for models. 

most stable improvement at validation time. ReAct becomes attractive when the planner can sustain long trajectories and the application can tolerate higher variance. The next subsection shows that this variance also arrives with a substantially larger token cost. More detailed subskill breakdown is provided in Appendix D.2. Figure 4 ( left and middle ) reports prompt and completion token consumption per query. The ac-counting includes the full procedure needed to ob-tain a candidate, so Best, Valid Best, and Valid ReAct include all calls made during search or tra-jectory construction rather than only the final se-lected workflow. This cost model aligns with de-ployment, where each intermediate planner call consumes budget. The trained checkpoints lie in the lowest-cost band. SFT and SFT+DPO track Valid Init closely because all three use a single direct inference pass. The success results in Figure 4 ( middle ) show the limit of that economy. Low token use does not translate into validation gain when the trained poli-cies remain near the zero-shot baseline. Evoflux raises token use because it evaluates and mutates multiple candidate workflows. The additional cost concentrates in prompt tokens, con-sistent with repeated calls that condition on candi-date state and execution feedback. Its cost remains bounded relative to ReAct because each mutation can consume a compact representation of the cur-rent candidate and the most useful failure evidence. ReAct dominates token consumption. Its trajec-tory format repeatedly feeds an expanding history of thoughts, actions, and observations back into the planner. As the trajectory grows, each subse-quent step carries the earlier context, producing a rapidly increasing prompt-token burden. This pattern explains why the setting with the strongest ReAct execution success also pays the highest to-ken cost. The DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B 

consumes fewer tokens on the validation split be-cause the modified planner falls back to the heuris-tic method. The heuristic method is described in Appendix A.4. Figures 4 frame the central tradeoff. ReAct can deliver the highest peak validation performance with a strong planner, but at a higher variance and cost. Evoflux achieves more predictable validation improvements at a lower token budget. Under a fixed deployment budget, the choice between the two test-time methods becomes a risk-control deci-sion rather than a pure accuracy comparison. 

Execution success across stages. Fig-ure 4 (right ) shows that execution success degrades sharply from the search split to the validation split. For Llama-3.2-3B , Init success reaches roughly 35% on the search split, while Valid Init falls to about 3%. Evoflux then raises Valid Best to about 17%, recovering a substantial fraction of the lost feasibility through evolutionary repair. 

Qwen3.5-4B begins with weaker Init feasibility on the search split, near 14%, but search lifts Best feasibility to roughly 58%. This is the highest feasibility rate in the validation comparison. On held-out tasks, Valid Init again drops to about 3%, while Valid Best rises to roughly 24%. The planner, therefore, generalizes poorly in one-shot mode but remains repairable under search. The trained checkpoints sit at the bottom of the feasibility chart. Llama-3.2-3B with SFT reaches about 5% execution success, and SFT +DPO falls to about 3%. The trained Qwen3.5-4B checkpoints produce essentially no feasible executions. In these runs, the trained Qwen3.5-4B policies failed to emit usable plans, so the framework fell back to a heuris-tic baseline. Training on search-mined traces there-fore reduces validation feasibility rather than im-proving it. 8In Appendix E we analyze the depth and width of the workflows generated by the model. Simi-larly, in Appendix F, we compare the workflows generated in the initial, ReAct, and the best work-flow. 

5 Conclusion 

This paper studies compact tool use as executable workflow repair. In MCP-style environments, small planners often produce graphs that look plausible but fail under tool resolution, schema validation, de-pendency tracking, or execution. Evoflux addresses this failure mode by using the compact model as a proposal operator inside an inference-time evolu-tionary loop over typed workflow edits. The held-out results support the train-versus-search framing. Evoflux raises execution feasibility from roughly 3% to 17–24% across small planners. SFT and SFT +DPO on the same search-mined data do not provide reliable gains and can collapse be-low zero-shot behavior. ReAct can reach higher peaks when the base planner sustains long trajecto-ries, but with higher variance and token cost. These findings do not rule out larger-scale dis-tillation. They show that under scarce teacher-trace budgets, the more reliable lever is to spend inference compute on execution-grounded repair over the actual task and tool catalog. Future work should study larger data budgets, learned search controllers, and training objectives that directly op-timize the typed edit space. 

Limitations 

Our conclusions are scoped to MCP-Bench and the compact planners we evaluate. The bench-mark is useful because it exposes live tool catalogs, schemas, and multi-step dependencies, but it does not cover every deployment environment. We also do not run the full set of deployment regimes on frontier-scale planners, so the results should be read as evidence about compact agents under realistic budgets rather than as a universal claim about all tool-use systems. The training comparison is intentionally small-budget. It shows that a few hundred search-mined traces are insufficient for reliable SFT or SFT +DPO gains in our setting, not that distil-lation is inherently ineffective. Larger datasets, stronger hyperparameter sweeps, different negative construction, reinforcement learning, or applying Evoflux on top of trained checkpoints may change the tradeoff. The evaluation also depends on execution-based LLM judging and token-level cost accounting. A uniform stronger judge across all conditions, cal-ibration of judge variance, and reporting wall-clock time, model calls, monetary cost, and tokens per solved task would give a sharper picture of when inference-time workflow search is practically preferable to larger models or larger training runs. 

Ethical Considerations 

Workflow agents may call tools that access user data, files, APIs, or business systems. Search can increase this risk because the agent may try several candidate workflows before selecting one. Deploy-ments should therefore enforce permission checks, sandboxing, rate limits, audit logs, and safeguards around irreversible actions. Execution traces used for training or release should avoid private data unless explicit consent, access controls, and filter-ing are in place. We release code and experiment artifacts under the Apache-2.0 License. The re-leased artifacts are intended for research on tool-using language agents, execution-grounded work-flow search, and evaluation of compact planners. Any derived data produced from MCP-Bench tasks, MCP server outputs, or model-generated execution traces should be used only in ways compatible with the licenses, access terms, and intended research use of the underlying resources. We do not grant ad-ditional rights over third-party benchmarks, tools, APIs, model outputs, or server-side resources used during evaluation. Users of the released artifacts are responsible for reviewing and adhering to the terms of the original resources before redistribu-tion, extension, or deployment. Execution traces used for training or release should avoid private or sensitive data unless explicit consent, access controls, and filtering are in place. Before release, we screen prompts, workflow traces, tool outputs, logs, and preference pairs for names, email ad-dresses, phone numbers, account identifiers, API keys, file paths, URLs containing private tokens, organization-specific secrets, and other strings that could name or uniquely identify individual people. We also screen for offensive or abusive content. Records that contain such material are removed or redacted, and released traces are limited to research-safe derived artifacts needed to reproduce the ex-periments. We exclude private tool outputs and avoid releasing raw logs when they contain sensi-9tive content. 

Use of AI assistants. The study evaluates lan-guage model agents within the experimental sys-tem. Apart from these experimental agents, AI assistants were used only to refine grammar, word-ing, and sentence structure in the manuscript. They were not used to design the research questions, cre-ate experimental claims, conduct analysis, alter results, annotate data, or make scientific decisions. All technical content, experiments, interpretations, and final writing decisions were reviewed and ap-proved by the authors. 

Acknowledgment 

This work received funding support from IBM-Rensselaer Future of Computing Research Collab-oration (2026). Shaowu Pan is supported by the Google Research Scholar Program. 

References 

Peter Belcak, Greg Heinrich, Shizhe Diao, Yonggan Fu, Xin Dong, Saurav Muralidharan, Yingyan Ce-line Lin, and Pavlo Molchanov. 2025. Small Lan-guage Models are the Future of Agentic AI. Preprint ,arXiv:2506.02153. Mert Cemri, Shubham Agrawal, Akshat Gupta, Shu Liu, Audrey Cheng, Qiuyang Mang, Ashwin Naren, Lutfi Eren Erdogan, Koushik Sen, Matei Zaharia, Alex Dimakis, and Ion Stoica. 2026. AdaEvolve: Adaptive LLM Driven Zeroth-Order Optimization. 

Preprint , arXiv:2602.20133. Baian Chen, Chang Shu, Ehsan Shareghi, Nigel Collier, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Fire-Act: Toward Language Agent Fine-tuning. Preprint ,arXiv:2310.05915. Zehui Chen, Kuikun Liu, Qiuchen Wang, Wenwei Zhang, Jiangning Liu, Dahua Lin, Kai Chen, and Feng Zhao. 2024. Agent-FLAN: Designing data and methods of effective agent tuning for large language models. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 9354–9366, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Lutfi Eren Erdogan, Nicholas Lee, Siddharth Jha, Se-hoon Kim, Ryan Tabrizi, Suhong Moon, Coleman Richard Charles Hooper, Gopala Anumanchipalli, Kurt Keutzer, and Amir Gholami. 2024. TinyAgent: Function Calling at the Edge. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing: System Demonstrations ,pages 80–88, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Joseph Gonzalez, Shishir Patil, Xin Wang, and Tianjun Zhang. 2024. Gorilla: Large Language Model Con-nected with Massive APIs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 , pages 126544– 126565, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Neural Information Processing Systems Foundation, Inc. (NeurIPS). Yun Luo, Zhen Yang, Fandong Meng, Yafu Li, Jie Zhou, and Yue Zhang. 2025. An Empirical Study of Catas-trophic Forgetting in Large Language Models During Continual Fine-Tuning. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing , 33:3776–3786. Alexander Novikov, Ngân V ˜u, Marvin Eisenberger, Em-ilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner, Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, M. Pawan Kumar, Abi-gail See, Swarat Chaudhuri, George Holland, Alex Davies, Sebastian Nowozin, Pushmeet Kohli, and Matej Balog. 2025. AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery. Preprint ,arXiv:2506.13131. Shishir G. Patil, Huanzhi Mao, Charlie Cheng-Jie Ji, Fanjia Yan, Vishnu Suresh, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. 2024. The berkeley function calling leaderboard (BFCL): From tool use to agentic evalua-tion of large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Shuofei Qiao, Honghao Gui, Chengfei Lv, Qianghuai Jia, Huajun Chen, and Ningyu Zhang. 2024. Making Language Models Better Tool Learners with Execu-tion Feedback. In Proceedings of the 2024 Confer-ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-guage Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3550–3568, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, Sihan Zhao, Lauren Hong, Runchu Tian, Ruobing Xie, Jie Zhou, Mark Gerstein, Dahai li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2024. ToolLLM: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world APIs. In The Twelfth International Con-ference on Learning Representations .Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea Finn. 2023. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , NIPS ’23, pages 53728– 53741, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Zeyu Ren, Ling Yue, Ran Li, Yishu Wang, Shengxi-ang Xu, Hanmo Liu, Shaowu Pan, and Shimin Di. 2026. Flowevo: Self-evolving agents through the co-evolution of workflows and executable skills. Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej Balog, M. Pawan Kumar, Emilien Dupont, Francisco J. R. 

10 Ruiz, Jordan S. Ellenberg, Pengming Wang, Omar Fawzi, Pushmeet Kohli, and Alhussein Fawzi. 2024. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models. Nature , 625(7995):468–475. Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Re-flexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Thirty-Seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Charlie Victor Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu, and Avi-ral Kumar. 2025. Scaling LLM test-time compute optimally can be more effective than scaling param-eters for reasoning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Zhenting Wang, Qi Chang, Hemani Patel, Shashank Biju, Cheng-En Wu, Quan Liu, Aolin Ding, Alireza Rezazadeh, Ankit Shah, Yujia Bao, and Eugene Siow. 2026. MCP-bench: Benchmarking tool-using LLM agents with complex real-world tasks via MCP servers. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik R Narasimhan. 2023a. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. In 

Thirty-Seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023b. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations .Ling Yue, Kushal Raj Bhandari, Ching-Yun Ko, Dhaval Patel, Shuxin Lin, Nianjun Zhou, Jianxi Gao, Pin-Yu Chen, and Shaowu Pan. 2026. From static tem-plates to dynamic runtime graphs: a survey of work-flow optimization for llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.22386 .Jianguo Zhang, Tian Lan, Ming Zhu, Zuxin Liu, Thai Hoang, Shirley Kokane, Weiran Yao, Juntao Tan, Zhi-wei Liu, Yihao Feng, Juan Carlos Niebles, Shelby Heinecke, Huan Wang, Silvio Savarese, and Caiming Xiong. 2025. xLAM: A family of large action mod-els to empower AI agent systems. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Amer-icas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 11583–11597, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Yuxiang Zhang, Jing Chen, Junjie Wang, Yaxin Liu, Cheng Yang, Chufan Shi, Xinyu Zhu, Zihao Lin, Hanwen Wan, Yujiu Yang, Tetsuya Sakai, Tian Feng, and Hayato Yamana. 2024. ToolBeHonest: A multi-level hallucination diagnostic benchmark for tool-augmented large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 11388–11422, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

A Search implementation details 

Here, we provide a more detailed search algorithm implementation. 

A.1 Action and candidate records 

The implementation separates a symbolic action from a compiled workflow. An action stores the original query, the base graph template, an ordered tuple of typed edits, token cost, prompt parameters, and optional error context. The compiler applies the edits, deduplicates redundant edits, and pro-duces a compiled workflow that can be checked and executed. This separation allows stable action hashes for caching and diversity tracking. Each candidate stores the action, compiled work-flow, score detail, scalar score, feasibility flag, fea-sibility reasons, execution result, planning attempts, and deterministic candidate identifier. Candidate identifiers derive from query ID, phase, and itera-tion index. Phases include initialization, evolution, and meta guidance. The design enables append-only history files and recovery after interruption. 

A.2 Candidate construction 

For every query, the planner first produces a base graph with no edits. The system compiles the graph, checks static feasibility, executes feasible workflows, and records the score. If compilation, checking, or execution fails, the system extracts a concise error context and retries planning up to the configured retry budget. This retry loop separates recoverable formatting errors from deeper planning failures. 

A.3 Growth signal and intensity 

Let ft be the score of the current child and f ∗ 

> t−1

be the best local score before observing the child. The normalized positive improvement is 

δt = max ( ft − f ∗

> t−1

∣f ∗

> t−1

∣ + ϵ , 0) . (1) The accumulated growth signal is an exponential moving average of squared improvements. 

Gt = ρG t−1 + (1 − ρ)δ2 

> t

. (2) The exploration intensity is 11 It = Imin + Imax − Imin 

1 + √Gt + ϵ . (3) Intensity controls parent selection and mutation mode. With probability It, the system samples a parent uniformly from the population. Otherwise, it runs a tournament among high-scoring candi-dates. With probability It, mutation enters explo-ration mode and uses random typed edits instead of an LLM-proposed edit. Low growth, therefore, increases exploration. Strong growth favors ex-ploitation. 

A.4 Heuristic fallback method 

The implementation includes a deterministic heuris-tic fallback for cases in which the planner can-not call, or cannot successfully use, the language model. This fallback provides a low cost safety path that can still return an executable graph template when model-based planning fails. The method deliberately favors guaranteed plan con-struction over plan quality. It uses only the query text, optional server hints, and the registered tool catalog. 

Fallback triggers. The plan() method enters the heuristic path under two conditions. First, the method skips the language model immediately when provider credentials are unavailable. If ac-cess to the LLM agent is denied, the planner calls the heuristic plan directly.      

> Provider Required credential
> bedrock Model identifier
> openrouter API key
> azure API key and endpoint
> base_url Endpoint URL
> Table 1: Provider credential checks used before invok-ing the model planner.

Second, the method enters the heuristic path af-ter repeated language model call failures. Any ex-ception raised during the model call is caught and retried up to max_retries . With the default setting of max_retries = 2 , the planner makes three total attempts. After the final failed attempt, the plan-ner prints [query_planner] all LLM attempts failed, using heuristic fallback and calls 

_heuristic_plan(query) .

Fallback algorithm. The _heuristic_plan 

uses token overlap between the query and the reg-istered tools. It first lowercases the query text and reads any _servers hint list from the query meta-data. It then tokenizes the query by splitting on non word characters and stores the result as a set of unique query tokens. For each registered (server, tool) pair, the method concatenates the server name, tool name, and tool description. It tokenizes this combined string with the same non word split and computes the score as the number of overlapping tokens be-tween the query and the tool description string. If the server appears in the _servers hint list, the method adds a fixed bonus of 10 points. This bonus lets explicit server hints dominate weak lexical overlap while preserving the same scoring machin-ery for all tools. The fallback then sorts tools by score in descending order and selects at most 

min(self.max_steps, 3) tools. The cap of three steps prevents a failed model call from expanding into a bloated fallback chain. If no tool receives a positive overlap score, the method can still select the highest ranked available tools with score zero. If the registry contains no tools at all, no keyword-based fallback can construct a meaningful tool chain. The selected tools are assembled into a strictly sequential graph. The first tool has no dependency. The second tool depends on the first. The third tool depends on the second. This linear structure avoids speculative branching and keeps dependency con-struction simple under fallback conditions. The method returns a GraphTemplate marked with heuristic=True . The template description is heuristic fallback plan , and token_cost 

is set to None , since the path consumes no lan-guage model tokens. As a result, the heuristic fall-back acts as a deterministic execution floor. It can keep the system moving when credentials are miss-ing or model calls fail, but it cannot reason over schemas, task semantics, or multi-hop evidence with the same flexibility as the model-based plan-ner. 

B Dataset Splits and Validation 

Both datasets are split into training and validation subsets with a validation fraction of 0.12 and ran-dom seed 42 . For SFT, records are shuffled and split directly. For DPO, splitting is performed by query identifier so that all preference pairs for a query remain in the same partition. This avoids leakage in which the model could see one prefer-12 ence pair for a task during training and another during validation. Validation mirrors the intended role of each dataset. After SFT, we measure JSON syntax rate, schema validity, node coverage against the teacher workflow fingerprint, a score proxy based on node coverage and reference score, a grounding proxy, and a tool appropriateness proxy. These metrics check whether the smaller model has learned to emit parseable workflows that resemble teacher traces and use available tool servers. After DPO, we measure whether the model assigns a higher probability to chosen workflows than rejected work-flows on held-out preference pairs, and we rerun the same structural validation used after SFT. This two-level validation separates format learning from preference learning. Overall, the two datasets serve complementary roles. DSFT teaches the smaller planner the gram-mar of executable workflows and the common structure of teacher-selected tool graphs. DDPO 

sharpens that planner by contrasting higher and lower scoring workflows under the same task con-text. The statistics in Figures 5 and 6 also show why training alone may remain insufficient. The SFT set is small and contains non-Oracle positives, while the DPO set contains strong preference gaps but a skewed negative edit distribution. These properties motivate the paper’s central compari-son between weight-updated smaller planners and inference-time workflow search. 

B.1 SFT and DPO Dataset Construction 

We construct two training datasets from the search split Dsearch . The first dataset supports supervised finetuning, while the second supports direct prefer-ence optimization. Both datasets inherit the same workflow representation used by Evoflux, where each candidate is a structured tool graph with ex-plicit tool nodes, parameters, dependencies, and a terminal output node. This choice keeps the train-ing target aligned with the executable object eval-uated at test time, rather than treating tool use as unstructured text generation. 

B.1.1 Supervised Fine Tuning Dataset 

The supervised finetuning dataset, denoted DSFT ,contains one positive workflow trace for each query. For every task in the search split, we select the highest-scoring workflow generated by the Sonnet teacher and serialize it as the assistant response in a chat-style training example. Each record contains a query identifier, the system and user prompt, the assistant workflow JSON, and the positive execu-tion score assigned to the selected candidate. The training objective, therefore, mimics the teacher’s best available executable workflow for each query. During preprocessing, the system and user mes-sages are formatted as the prompt, while the full conversation, including the assistant workflow, is formatted as the supervised sequence. The com-pletion only collator masks all prompt tokens and computes loss only on the assistant workflow. This design prevents the model from spending capacity memorizing the task and catalog text, and directs the update toward workflow syntax, graph struc-ture, server and tool selection, and node parameter patterns. The SFT dataset contains 177 examples. The average positive score is 6.4146 , with a standard deviation of 1.4831 and a range from 3.5833 to 

10 .0000 . The score distribution in Figure 5 con-centrates around the mid quality region between roughly 5 and 7, while retaining a thinner high quality tail that reaches the maximum score. This distribution shows that the SFT data should be inter-preted as behavior cloning from the best-observed teacher candidates, rather than as oracle super-vision. Several selected traces remain imperfect under execution-based judging, which matters be-cause a smaller model trained only on this dataset may learn common workflow patterns without fully learning robust repair or search behavior. The average SFT prompt length is 1027 .9 words. Prompt lengths span roughly 750 to 1300 words, with most examples near the mean. This length reflects the information burden of using the MCP-style tool, since each example must expose the task, available servers, tool descriptions, and schema constraints. The box plot of positive scores gives the same picture from a different angle. The me-dian lies near 6, the interquartile range covers moderate-quality workflows, and the upper whisker extends to perfect executions. SFT therefore pro-vides useful structural supervision, but it has a lim-ited data scale and mixed execution quality. 

B.1.2 DPO Preference Dataset 

The direct preference optimization dataset, denoted 

DDPO , converts the search trajectories into pair-wise preferences. Each DPO record contains a prompt, a chosen workflow, a rejected workflow, a query identifier, the chosen score, the rejected score, and the score gap. The chosen workflow 13 Figure 5: SFT dataset diagnostics. The plots summarize the quality and length profile of the supervised fine tuning data. 

is the higher scoring candidate, while the rejected workflow is a hard negative drawn from lower scor-ing alternatives for the same task. The DPO stage uses the SFT checkpoint as the reference model, so preference learning adjusts the supervised model toward workflows that score better under execution-based evaluation. Negative selection uses action identifier bucket diversity, matching the pruning logic used during evolutionary search. This matters because naive preference construction can flood the dataset with near duplicate failures. Bucketed selection spreads rejected workflows across different action patterns, tool choices, and edit histories. As a result, the pref-erence signal covers a wider set of failure modes, including weak tool selection, missing parameters, poor grounding, broken dependencies, and unnec-essary workflow steps. The DPO dataset contains 624 preference pairs. The average chosen score is 6.3945 , while the av-erage rejected score is 3.2654 . The mean score gap is 3.1291 , and the gap ranges from 1.0000 to 

9.7222 . Figure 6 shows that nearly all chosen and rejected pairs fall above the diagonal in the cho-sen versus rejected scatter plot, confirming that the preference labels encode a consistent ranking sig-nal. The gap histogram also shows a broad spread rather than a narrow margin, which gives DPO both easy separations and harder contrasts. The score comparison histogram shows substan-tial separation between chosen and rejected work-flows. Chosen candidates cluster mostly between 5

and 7, with a tail toward 10 , while rejected candi-dates concentrate between 1 and 5. Some overlap remains in the middle of the score range. That over-lap is valuable because it forces the model to distin-guish workflows that share superficial structure but differ in execution quality. A preference set with no overlap would mainly teach coarse rejection of broken outputs, while this dataset also teaches finer distinctions among plausible workflows. The action bucket distribution uses all 16 buck-ets. Counts vary across buckets, but no single bucket consumes the entire dataset. This supports the intended role of bucketed hard negative sam-pling. The rejected edit operation distribution is less balanced. Negatives with zero recorded edit op-erations dominate the dataset, followed by smaller 14 Figure 6: DPO dataset analysis. The plots summarize pairwise preference data constructed from higher and lower scoring workflow candidates. 

groups with one, three, six, and a few higher edit counts. This pattern suggests that many rejected candidates come directly from lower-scoring alter-natives rather than deep edit chains. The dataset still provides useful contrast, but the skew should be treated as a limitation when interpreting DPO gains. The DPO field length analysis shows that most training examples remain small enough for stable preference learning. The total word count distri-bution has a mean of 445 .3 words and a 95 th per-centile of 624 .0 words. The prompt field dominates the total length because it carries the task and tool catalog context, while chosen and rejected comple-tions are much shorter serialized workflows. This length profile suits DPO because the model com-pares candidate workflow completions under the same task context, rather than learning from long unconstrained rationales. 

C Hyperparameter Configuration 

Tables 2–6 report the default hyperparameters used across the five experimental stages. Unless other-wise stated, the same values are used for the search and validation splits. 15 Table 2: Evoflux hyperparameters used during 

STAGES=search and STAGES=validate . Pertur-bations are disabled during validation by setting 

perturbation_scale=0.0 .                                            

> Parameter Default Description
> Core search budget
> B5Mutation iterations per query
> K10 Population cap
> fb_repeats 2Minibatch repeats
> alpha 0.05 LCB confidence level
> max_steps 15 Maximum tool steps per execution
> plan_retries 3Maximum LLM replanning attempts
> seed 0Random seed
> timeout 15.0 s Tool call timeout
> Adaptive exploration
> ρ0.9 EMA decay for growth signal
> Gt
> Imin 0.1 Minimum exploration probability
> Imax 0.7 Maximum exploration probability
> τm0.12 Meta guidance stagnation threshold
> meta_cooldown_ frac
> 0.2 Fraction of Bbetween meta guidance calls
> ϵ1e-8 Numerical stability constant
> Selection and mutation
> Tournament size kmin (5,∣P∣) Contestants per tournament Top quartile size ∣P∣/ 4Exploit pool fraction
> max_context_no des
> 8Nodes retained in compressed mutation context
> robust_method hoeffding LCB computation method
> Search stage perturbations
> timeout_inject _p
> 0.02 Timeout injection probability
> tool_error_inj ect_p
> 0.02 Tool error injection probability
> latency_jitter _ms
> 200 Maximum latency jitter in milliseconds

D Subskill Comparison 

D.1 Subskill profile before and after search on the Search Split 

Figure 7 shows how evolution search changes the six judge dimensions for different models. Before search, sonnet-4-5 and llama3-70b dominate the radar plot across nearly all axes. Smaller planners cluster near the center, with most subskill scores around 1 to 2. After the search, the smaller pro-files expand, but the gains concentrate in specific dimensions. The clearest improvements occur in tool selec-tion, tool appropriateness, and task completion. 

Qwen3.5-4B improves strongly on tool appropriate-

Table 3: ReAct hyperparameters used during 

STAGES=react .            

> Parameter Default Description
> max_steps 15 Maximum Thought, Action, Observation rounds
> tool_retries 10 Consecutive tool failures before aborting
> parse_retries 3Consecutive parse failures before aborting
> max_tokens 3096 Maximum tokens per LLM call
> temperature 0.0 Greedy decoding temperature

ness and approaches the llama3-70b contour on that axis. This indicates that typed edits can repair semantic tool-matching errors when the planner has already proposed a plausible workflow skele-ton. Search also raises task completion for several other smaller planners, suggesting that execution feedback helps convert partially correct workflows into more useful final answers. Grounding and parameter accuracy improve less. Even after search, smaller planners stay close to the center on these axes, while sonnet-4-5 expands strongly on grounding and tool appropriateness. Dependency awareness and parallelism improve modestly across planners. The resulting profile shows a shift in the smaller-agent bottleneck. After the search, the main failure no longer lies only in finding a plausible tool. It increasingly lies in binding the correct values, preserving intermediate evidence, and feeding downstream calls with the right arguments. 16 Figure 7: Subskill radar plots before and after search on the search split 

D.2 Subskill profile before and after search on the Validation Split 

Table 7 shows that Evoflux improves small agents by repairing the mechanics of executable tool use rather than by uniformly lifting every capability. The largest gains for Llama-3.2-3B and SmolLM3-3B cluster around tool selection, tool appropriate-ness, parameter accuracy, and grounding, the same failure modes targeted by typed workflow edits and execution feedback. For Llama-3.2-3B, Valid Best raises the single-server overall score from 0.912 to 2.29. Tool appropriateness climbs from 1.22 to 3.57, parameter accuracy from 1.32 to 3.65, ground-ing from 0.835 to 2.37, and tool selection from 1.27 to 3.61. The same pattern appears at two servers, where the overall score rises from 0.725 to 1.91, tool appropriateness from 0.917 to 2.62, parame-ter accuracy from 0.867 to 2.85, grounding from 0.85 to 2.43, and tool selection from 0.892 to 2.73. SmolLM3-3B follows the same repair profile. Its overall score rises from 1.37 to 2.03 at one server, from 0.653 to 1.85 at two servers, and from 0.654 to 1.85 at three servers. At three servers, Parameter accuracy rises from 1.33 to 3.68, and tool selec-tion from 0.988 to 2.86. These numbers support the paper’s view that execution-guided search can turn weak but recoverable workflow skeletons into better grounded tool graphs. Qwen3.5-4B sharpens the planner-dependent in-terpretation. ReAct posts the highest overall scores for Qwen at every complexity tier, beating Valid Best by 0.34 points on single-server tasks, 0.51 points on two-server tasks, and 0.75 points on three-server tasks. Across 3 servers, ReAct scores 3.95 overall, compared with 3.20 for Valid Best; 5.10 for tool appropriateness, compared with 3.88; and 5.12 for tool selection, compared with 4.59. Parameter accuracy gives only a narrow exception. ReAct wins at one server, 5.24 versus 4.95, nearly ties at two servers, 3.78 versus 3.75, and trails Valid Best by only 0.15 points at three servers, 5.15 versus 5.30. This makes the planner-dependent reading cleaner. ReAct rewards Qwen when long tool tra-jectories remain coherent, while Evoflux supplies controlled repair when trajectory coherence breaks down. This fits the paper’s validation framing: Re-Act delivers the highest peaks with greater variance and higher cost, while Evoflux provides more pre-dictable gains under a lower token budget. The comparison becomes less favorable for Qwen3.5-4B once training is included. Llama-3.2-3B shows that training can still transfer something useful. Its trained checkpoints lift overall scores above Valid Init at two and three servers, with both SFT and SFT+DPO reaching 0.956 at two servers compared with 0.725 for Valid Init, and reaching 1.01 and 1.06 at three servers compared with 0.683 for Valid Init. Yet both trained checkpoints remain below Valid Best at every tier, with corresponding overall scores of 2.29, 1.91, and 1.45. Qwen3.5-4B shows the sharper failure. SFT+DPO falls to 0.683 overall at three servers, well below Valid Init at 1.36 and Valid Best at 3.20. Grounding falls from 0.975 at Valid Init to 0.425 after SFT+DPO, while tool selection drops from 2.08 to 1.09. The sub-score pattern therefore supports a narrower thesis than a broad training win. Inference-time search functions as execution-grounded repair for brittle planners. finetuning under a small trace budget often behaves like shallow imitation of workflow 17 Table 4: SFT hyperparameters used during 

STAGES=sft .                                  

> Parameter Default Description
> sft_epochs 2Training epochs
> sft_lr 1e-5 Learning rate
> sft_batch 1Per device batch size
> sft_grad_accum 4Gradient accumulation steps
> max_seq_len 2500 Maximum token sequence length
> val_frac 0.12 Validation holdout fraction
> val_gen 20 Generated examples during validation
> gen_batch 2Validation generation batch size
> lr_scheduler_t ype
> cosine Learning rate scheduler
> eval_strategy epoch Evaluation frequency
> save_strategy epoch Checkpoint frequency
> save_total_lim it
> 2Maximum retained checkpoints
> load_best_mode l_at_end
> True Restore best checkpoint after training
> metric_for_bes t_model
> eval loss Best model selection metric
> bf16 True BFloat16 precision
> tf32 True TF32 enabled
> gradient_check pointing
> True Memory saving checkpointing
> dataloader_num _workers
> 0Dataloader worker count
> seed 42 Train and validation split seed

form, learning some tool-call shapes while failing to internalize the adaptive repair process that pro-duced successful workflows. 

E Graph Properties of the Workflows on the Validation Split 

Figure 8 compares the structural shape of gener-ated workflows across the initial policy, Evoflux, ReAct, and trained checkpoints. The left panel reports workflow depth, which reflects the length of sequential dependency chains. The right panel reports workflow width, which reflects the num-ber of parallel or branch-like actions available at a workflow level. These two measurements separate chain complexity from breadth. Depth captures how far information must travel through ordered steps. Width captures how broadly the planner gathers, transforms, or branches over evidence. The clearest pattern is that ReAct often gener-ates the deepest workflows. This aligns with its trajectory format, where each action appends to a growing sequence of prior thoughts, tool calls, and observations. Valid ReAct produces especially large depth for Qwen3.5-4B and remains among 

Table 5: DPO hyperparameters used during 

STAGES=sft+dpo . The reference model is an im-plicit frozen copy of the policy.                                

> Parameter Default Description
> dpo_epochs 1Training epochs
> dpo_lr 5e-5 Learning rate
> dpo_batch 1Per device batch size
> dpo_grad_accum 4Gradient accumulation steps
> dpo_beta 0.1 KL penalty coefficient β
> dpo_max_seq_le n
> 1500 Maximum token sequence length
> dpo_min_sample s
> 300 Minimum preference pairs required
> val_dpo_pairs 40 Maximum pairs used for reward margin evaluation
> warmup_ratio 0.1 Learning rate warmup fraction
> lr_scheduler_t ype
> cosine Learning rate scheduler
> bf16 True BFloat16 precision
> tf32 True TF32 enabled
> gradient_check pointing
> False Disabled for DPO
> save_total_lim it
> 2Maximum retained checkpoints
> load_best_mode l_at_end
> True Restore best checkpoint after training
> metric_for_bes t_model
> eval loss Best model selection metric
> truncation_mod e
> keep end Sequence truncation strategy
> precompute_ref _log_probs
> True Precompute reference log probabilities
> precompute_ref _batch_size
> 1Reference precompute batch size

the deepest settings for the other planners. This ex-tra depth should be interpreted carefully. The main validation results show that ReAct can produce strong outcomes with a capable planner, while also increasing variance and token cost because each subsequent step accumulates more context. Evoflux shows a different structural profile. Best and Valid Best generally increase workflow width more consistently than depth, especially on the validation side. This suggests that evolutionary repair broadens the workflow by adding or pre-serving evidence-gathering calls, lookup paths, and dependency-supporting steps instead of simply ex-tending a long sequential chain. This behavior matches the typed edit design, where search can in-sert missing evidence steps, remove harmful calls, redirect dependencies, and reorder execution with-out regenerating the entire graph. The trained checkpoints show a weaker struc-tural signal. SFT and SFT+DPO sometimes match or slightly exceed the initial workflow width, but 18 Figure 8: Average workflow depth and width across stages. Table 6: Shared LoRA adapter configuration used for both SFT and DPO. Quantization is disabled by default.                   

> Parameter Default Description
> lora_r 16 LoRA rank
> lora_alpha 32 LoRA scaling parameter
> lora_dropout 0.1 Dropout rate
> lora_bias none Bias adaptation setting
> lora_task_type CAUSAL LM Causal LM fine tuning objective
> target_modules listed q_proj ,k_proj ,v_proj ,o_ proj ,gate_proj ,up_proj ,
> down_proj

that added structure does not yield reliable execu-tion gains. This supports the paper’s broader find-ing that trained checkpoints can reproduce surface action patterns while failing to preserve executable dependency structure. Wider graphs can therefore become brittle when extra calls are not tied to valid intermediate outputs. This figure reinforces the central interpretation of the results. Workflow quality depends on how the graph structure carries evidence, rather than on graph size alone. ReAct tends to spend compute on deeper trajectories. Evoflux tends to spend com-pute on broader execution-guided repair. SFT and SFT+DPO can imitate the visible shape of work-flows, yet often miss the dependency logic that makes those workflows executable. Effective work-flows balance depth and width so that each step either gathers evidence, transforms an intermediate result, or supports the final grounded answer. 

F Workflow Structure Analysis 

Figure 9 compares Llama-3.2-3B validation work-flows across zero-shot inference, Evoflux, SFT, and SFT+DPO. The examples explain the aggregate val-idation trend, where Valid Best substantially outper-forms the trained checkpoints. Evoflux improves weak initial graphs through execution-guided re-pair, while SFT and SFT+DPO often preserve shal-low tool-call templates rather than reliable work-flow structure. For huge_icons_000 , the initial workflow scores 1.00 because it begins with irrelevant paper-search tools before reaching the Huge Icons server. Evoflux raises the score to 2.37 by starting di-rectly with icon listing and search, giving the work-flow task-relevant evidence earlier. The remaining platform-usage calls still limit the final score, but the graph shows a clear repair in tool-family se-lection. By contrast, SFT repeats the paper-search pattern and SFT+DPO expands into a longer chain of mostly unproductive calls, dropping to 0.80. For context7_000 , the difference is stronger. The initial workflow scores 1.20 because it calls the right Context7 tools but weakly connects library resolution to documentation retrieval. Evoflux reaches 4.93 by resolving library identifiers, feed-ing them into documentation calls, and routing re-trieved content into synthesis before the final out-put. This graph succeeds because its edges carry usable evidence, not because it simply contains more calls. SFT and SFT+DPO keep the broad resolve-then-retrieve shape, but duplicate steps and weak dependencies keep their scores low. Overall, the figure shows that workflow qual-ity depends on correct tool selection, grounded argument binding, and dependency preservation. Evoflux improves these properties at inference time. The trained checkpoints often learn the surface shape of successful traces, but fail to reproduce 19 Figure 9: Representative validation workflows for Llama-3.2-3B under four regimes. Evoflux produces stronger held-out workflows by selecting more relevant tools and repairing dependency flow, while SFT and SFT+DPO often imitate action patterns without preserving executable structure. 

the adaptive repair process that produced them. The validation results support three conclusions. First, Evoflux transfers beyond the search split. Valid Best recovers roughly the same score range as Best for Llama-3.2-3B and roughly two-thirds of the Best score for Qwen3.5-4B . Both Valid Best scores exceed the trained-checkpoint means by more than a factor of two. Second, search-mined training data does not teach the small planners to reproduce the search process. SFT and SFT +DPO match or underper-form Valid Init for both planners, and Qwen3.5-4B 

suffers complete planning collapse after training. The same execution histories that produce useful inference-time variants fail to encode reliable work-flow search into the model weights. Third, the token results weaken the concern that inference-time evolution merely buys per-formance at the expense of runaway costs. For 

Llama-3.2-3B , search reduces total token use on validation tasks. For Qwen3.5-4B , search adds a small amount of token cost while delivering a much larger gain in score and feasibility. The validation split, therefore, supports the paper’s central fram-ing. Compact workflow construction benefits more from execution-guided inference-time refinement than from supervised or preference training over the resulting traces. 20 Complexity  Single  2-server  3-server 

> Metric Label  Overall score
> Task fulfill. Grounding  Tool appropr. Param. accuracy Dependency aware. Parallel eff. Task completion Tool selection Planning eff.
> Overall score
> Task fulfill. Grounding  Tool appropr. Param. accuracy Dependency aware. Parallel eff. Task completion Tool selection Planning eff.
> Overall score
> Task fulfill. Grounding  Tool appropr. Param. accuracy Dependency aware. Parallel eff. Task completion Tool selection Planning eff. DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B Valid ReAct  0.554  0.548  0.626  0.548  0.539  0.53  0.53  0.587  0.543  0.53  0.464  0.433  0.6  0.45  0.433  0.433  0.433  0.517  0.442  0.433  0.337  0.35  0.35  0.325  0.325  0.35  0.325  0.35  0.325  0.338 Valid Init  0.601  0.6  0.733  0.771  0.676  0.59  0.581  0.667  0.724  0.586  0.692  0.727  0.855  0.709  0.891  0.673  0.673  0.791  0.8  0.673  0.575  0.575  0.575  0.575  0.575  0.575  0.575  0.575  0.575  0.575 SFT  0.496  0.496  0.496  0.496  0.496  0.496  0.496  0.496  0.496  0.496  0.649  0.458  1.28  0.625  0.608  0.458  0.458  0.871  0.617  0.458  0.725  0.725  0.725  0.725  0.725  0.725  0.725  0.725  0.725  0.725 SFT DPO  0.68  0.643  0.852  0.626  0.704  0.626  0.626  0.748  0.665  0.626  0.6  0.6  0.733  0.567  0.567  0.567  0.567  0.667  0.567  0.567  0.554  0.575  0.55  0.55  0.55  0.55  0.55  0.562  0.55  0.55 Valid Best  0.981  0.895  1.37  1.05  1.42  0.867  0.848  1.13  1.23  0.857  1 1.05  1.33  1.02  1.16  1 1 1.19  1.09  1 1.18  1.15  1.7  1.05  1.05  1.05  1.05  1.43  1.05  1.05 Llama-3.2-3B  Valid ReAct  0.906  0.748  1.24  1.1  0.913  0.765  0.661  0.996  1.01  0.713  1.49  1.25  1.65  1.82  1.82  1.45  0.95  1.45  1.82  1.2  0.662  0.625  0.75  0.8  0.7  0.55  0.55  0.688  0.75  0.55 Valid Init  0.912  0.739  0.835  1.22  1.32  0.678  0.678  0.787  1.27  0.678  0.725  0.55  0.85  0.917  0.867  0.583  0.583  0.7  0.892  0.583  0.683  0.6  0.6  1.07  0.6  0.625  0.6  0.6  0.838  0.613 SFT  0.951  0.704  0.93  1.2  1.5  0.704  0.67  0.817  1.35  0.687  0.956  0.767  1.45  1.2  0.8  0.8  0.717  1.11  1 0.758  1.01  0.825  1 1.52  1.18  0.8  0.725  0.912  1.35  0.762 SFT DPO  0.855  0.652  1.1  0.939  1.17  0.643  0.626  0.874  1.06  0.635  0.956  0.717  1.02  1.28  1.23  0.733  0.75  0.867  1.26  0.742  1.06  0.7  0.85  2.15  1.3  0.7  0.675  0.775  1.73  0.688 Valid Best  2.29  1.57  2.37  3.57  3.65  1.49  1.06  1.97  3.61  1.27  1.91  1.32  2.43  2.62  2.85  1.17  1.1  1.88  2.73  1.13  1.45  1.32  1.57  1.68  1.9  1.12  1.1  1.45  1.79  1.11 Qwen3.5-4B  Valid ReAct  3.54  2.5  3.9  5.05  5.24  2.9  1.65  3.2  5.14  2.28  2.85  2.4  3.58  3.42  3.78  2.48  1.45  2.99  3.6  1.97  3.95  3.48  4.5  5.1  5.15  3.8  1.7  3.99  5.12  2.75 Valid Init  1.82  1.23  2.04  2.63  2.7  1.44  0.896  1.63  2.67  1.17  1 0.737  1.35  1.09  1.6  0.671  0.554  1.05  1.35  0.612  1.36  1.15  0.975  2.07  2.09  0.969  0.919  1.06  2.08  0.944 SFT  1.28  0.828  1.47  1.68  1.96  0.898  0.872  1.15  1.82  0.885  1.57  0.946  1.53  2.01  2.95  1.05  0.929  1.24  2.48  0.987  1.42  0.9  1.55  2.17  2.38  0.775  0.725  1.23  2.27  0.75 SFT DPO  1.57  0.952  1.69  2.49  2.52  1.03  0.748  1.32  2.51  0.888  1.47  0.933  1.37  2.33  2.48  0.9  0.817  1.15  2.41  0.858  0.683  0.55  0.425  1.27  0.9  0.475  0.475  0.488  1.09  0.475 Valid Best  3.2  2.07  3.84  4.73  4.95  2.31  1.29  2.96  4.84  1.8  2.34  1.97  2.32  3.17  3.75  1.43  1.38  2.14  3.46  1.41  3.2  2.2  4.4  3.88  5.3  2.02  1.4  3.3  4.59  1.71 SmolLM3-3B  Valid ReAct  0.751  0.652  0.983  0.861  0.791  0.609  0.609  0.817  0.826  0.609  0.553  0.567  0.55  0.55  0.55  0.55  0.55  0.558  0.55  0.55  1.03  0.875  1.45  0.825  1.4  0.825  0.8  1.16  1.11  0.812 Valid Init  1.37  0.887  1.41  1.89  2.36  0.948  0.722  1.15  2.12  0.835  0.653  0.65  0.867  0.617  0.633  0.583  0.567  0.758  0.625  0.575  0.654  0.488  0.488  0.644  1.33  0.488  0.488  0.488  0.988  0.488 SFT  1.28  0.861  1.43  1.88  1.89  0.887  0.713  1.15  1.88  0.8  0.892  0.675  0.771  0.938  1.7  0.638  0.638  0.723  1.32  0.638  0.958  0.85  0.75  1.12  1.52  0.75  0.75  0.8  1.32  0.75 SFT DPO  0.997  0.809  1.1  1.34  1.28  0.73  0.722  0.957  1.31  0.726  0.917  0.817  1.05  0.983  1.13  0.767  0.75  0.933  1.06  0.758  0.883  0.75  0.675  0.775  1.72  0.7  0.675  0.713  1.25  0.688 Valid Best  2.03  1.36  2.48  2.59  3.43  1.3  1.02  1.92  3.01  1.16  1.85  1.48  2.18  2.44  2.51  1.41  1.07  1.83  2.48  1.24  1.85  1.34  1.66  2.04  3.68  1.14  1.24  1.5  2.86  1.19
> Table 7: Subscore performance across complexity levels for all models and stages.

21 Algorithm 2 Adaptive workflow evolution for one task, full procedure. 

Require: Task q, planner P , compiler C, executor E, budget B, population cap K, retry budget R, meta threshold τm, meta cooldown fraction γ, EMA factor ρ, intensity bounds (Imin , I max )

1: Initialization with planner retry 

2: ctx ← ⊥ 

3: for r = 1 to R do 

4: g ← P. PLAN (q, ctx )

5: c0 ← BUILD CANDIDATE (g)

6: if c0 feasible and execution succeeded then 

7: break 

8: end if 

9: ctx ← EXTRACT ERROR (c0)

10: end for 

11: P ← {c0}; f ∗ ← f (c0); G ← 0; cd ← 0

12: Evolutionary loop 

13: for t = 1 to B do 

14: I ← Imin + (Imax − Imin )/( 1 + √G + ε)

15: if G < τm and cd = 0 then ▷ Meta guidance 16: cm ← P. META GUIDE (q, best (P), worst3 (P)) 

17: if cm feasible then 

18: δ ← max (( f (cm) − f ∗)/ max (∣ f ∗∣, ε ), 0)

19: G ← ρG + (1 − ρ) δ2

20: f ∗ ← max (f ∗, f (cm)) 

21: P ← PRUNE (P ∪ {cm}, K )

22: record cm with phase = meta 

23: end if 

24: cd ← ⌈γB ⌉

25: end if 

26: cd ← max (0, cd − 1)

27: p ← SELECT PARENT (P, I ) ▷ uniform w.p. I, top-quartile tournament otherwise 28: e ← COLLECT EVIDENCE (p) ▷ per-node error rates from p’s execution logs 29: explore ∼ BERNOULLI (I)

30: ctx ← ⊥ ; c′ ← ⊥ 

31: for r = 1 to R do ▷ Mutation path with planner retry 32: if explore then 

33: a′ ← COMPOUND RANDOM EDITS (p, e, n ) ▷ n stacked random edits, evidence-weighted nodes, no LLM 34: else 

35: ν ← COMPRESS CONTEXT (p, e ) ▷ failing nodes, neighbours, snapshot diff 36: Ω ← FEASIBLE OPS (p)

37: a′ ← P. PROPOSE EDIT (q, e, ν, Ω, ctx )

38: end if 

39: c′ ← BUILD CANDIDATE (a′)

40: if c′ feasible and execution succeeded then 

41: break 

42: end if 

43: ctx ← EXTRACT ERROR (c′)

44: end for 

45: if ¬c′.feasible then 

46: continue 

47: end if 

48: δ ← max (( f (c′) − f ∗)/ max (∣ f ∗∣, ε ), 0)

49: G ← ρG + (1 − ρ) δ2

50: f ∗ ← max (f ∗, f (c′)) 

51: P ← PRUNE (P ∪ {c′}, K ) ▷ 16-bucket action-hash binning, round-robin to K

52: record c′ with phase = evolve 

53: end for 

54: return P

22