Title: SkillFuzz: Fuzzing Skill Composition for Implicit Intents Discovery in Open Skill Marketplaces

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.02345v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Jul 2026 01:30:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# SkillFuzz: Fuzzing Skill Composition for Implicit Intents Discovery in Open Skill Marketplaces 

Jinwei Hu 1, Yi Dong 1, Youcheng Sun 2, Xiaowei Huang 1

> 1

School of Computer Science and Informatics, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom 

> 2

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates 

Abstract —Large Language Model (LLM)-based agents in-creasingly automate software engineering tasks through reusable skills, natural-language instruction documents that guide plan-ning and execution. Open skill marketplaces enable users to assemble agents by co-activating community-contributed skills, but marketplace operators typically audit skills in isolation. As a result, individually benign skills may interact to redirect an agent toward unintended objectives, which we term implicit intents . Detecting such intents is challenging because the effect emerges only through skill composition, execution environments are often unavailable at admission time, and the space of possible co-activations grows exponentially with marketplace size. In this paper, we formulate implicit-intent discovery as a fuzzing problem over skill compositions, where skill compositions are the unit under test, planning artifacts expose agent intent before execution, and deviations from a skill-free baseline serve as a differential oracle. Based on this formulation, we propose S KILL -FUZZ , the first execution-free testing approach that extracts structured skill contracts and uses contract-guided Monte Carlo Tree Search to prioritize potentially conflicting compositions. Across representative skill-marketplace workloads, S KILL FUZZ 

discovers over 1,000 distinct implicit intents under a fixed query budget, confirms more than 80% of the highest-risk flagged compositions during execution-time validation, and identifies substantially more high-severity implicit intents than alternative search strategies while exploring only a fraction of the pairwise interaction space they require. 

Index Terms —Agentic Software Engineering, Skill Market-places, Compositional Intent Testing, Directed Fuzzing 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Traditional software engineering (SE) delivers complex be-haviors through carefully authored code, where capabilities are explicitly programmed, tested, and maintained by human developers [1]. Yet the rise of Large Language Model (LLM) based agents is reshaping this paradigm into a more automated agentic SE [2]. Agents can now plan, reason, and act across diverse tasks at inference time, increasingly replacing human-written logic with flexible, language-driven behavior [3]– [5]. Rather than extending an agent by writing new code, developers and users now contribute and utilize skills , natural-language instruction documents co-activated at inference time to direct how the agent reasons and plans [6]. Open skill marketplaces such as ClawHub [7] have emerged to host and distribute these skills at scale, and a user can assemble an agent simply by selecting a bundle of skills and co-activating them, whereupon the agent can reason over their combined instruction context and implement corresponding tasks [8]. 

Fig. 1: Compositional implicit intents in an LLM skill mar-ketplace. Individually audited skills are safe in isolation, but their joint activation reshapes the planning agent’s belief state, producing a plan drift toward implicit intents. However, this convenience introduces a safety problem that per-skill content audits cannot address [9]. Marketplace opera-tors aggregate contributions from many independent develop-ers and admit them for publication, a process that operates at a scale where joint review of every co-activation is infeasible. They generally verify only that each instruction document contains no obvious malicious injection before listing [8], resting on the structurally false assumption that composing individually safe skills produces a reliable agent. When multi-ple skills are co-activated, the LLM processes their documents as a unified context, jointly shaping the agent’s belief state ,its internal representation of what the task requires and what actions to take. This joint reasoning can redirects the agent toward unintended objectives, and unlike adversarial prompt injection, no single skill need carry a malicious payload for 

> arXiv:2607.02345v1 [cs.SE] 2 Jul 2026

this redirection to occur. For example, consider a contribution-analysis skill that summarizes financial contributions and a csv-processing skill that handles structured data, each raising no audit flag in isolation, yet their co-activation instructs the agent try to modify the original dataset files beyond its read-only authorization, a emergent side-effect that appears in nei-ther document alone. We refer to such unintended objectives as implicit intents , as illustrated in Figure 1. Implicit intents constitute a new category of compositional defect, arising from the interaction between skills. This is the similar failure mode that software engineering has long studied as component-interaction faults in integration testing [10]– [12]. It now recurs in natural-language instruction composition rather than in code. Nevertheless, detecting them faces three distinct challenges. First, operators lack a deployment environ-ment in which to execute agent workflows, and even where the environment can be installed, executing every candidate co-activation in real workflows at scale is costly. Second, compositional effects emerge inside the LLM’s belief state and are invisible to any static file analysis. Third, the co-activation space grows exponentially with library size, making exhaustive search intractable. The first two obstacles share a common root, the absence of an observable surface for testing compositional effects without deployment. We resolve both by exploiting the plan-then-act paradigm that LLM-based agents nearly universally follow [13], [14]. Many agentic systems normally expose, or can be configured to expose, a pre-execution decision artifact, such as a plan, reasoning trace, todo list, or proposed tool call sequence, that captures the agent’s intended course of action before some or all tool executions occur [15]–[18]. This plan-level artifact captures the agent’s intended course of action before some or all tool executions occur, externalizing the agent’s belief state before 

execution and rendering implicit intents already visible in its text. Therefore, we use plan drift from a skill-free baseline as a differential oracle on this planning surface [19]. The third obstacle is not solved by the oracle alone, since knowing how to score a candidate activation does not say which activations to generate under a fixed budget. Closing this gap requires a search strategy guided by the oracle’s own feedback. Building on this insight, we propose SKILL FUZZ , an execution-free fuzzing framework that operationalizes plan drift as a differential oracle and searches the co-activation space under a fixed query budget. To make the search tractable, SKILL FUZZ first extracts a skill contract from each instruction document, a structured representation of properties such as its preconditions, postconditions, and declared state modifica-tions, and embeds each skill in a semantic space that supports principled searching about which combinations are likely to produce implicit behaviors. The search then seeds its candidate set with the most semantically conflicting contract pairs and steers each subsequent step toward the embedding region of the most recently discovered high-drift intent, concentrating the budget on combinations most likely to extend known com-positional risks. Together, these two steps turn the planning-level insight into a concrete, budget-aware testing procedure and this paper makes three main contributions as summarized below:  

> •

We formulate compositional intent testing , a new testing problem that seeks to identify implicit intents arising from the interaction of individually benign skills.  

> •

We present S KILL FUZZ , an execution-free fuzzing tech-nique that extracts structured skill contracts and uses contract-guided search to efficiently discover implicit intents in the exponentially large skill co-activation space.  

> •

We conduct extensive experiments across diverse plan-ning agents and representative tasks, establishing S KILL -FUZZ as a practical and reliable mechanism for compo-sitional skill screening. II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 

This section establishes the background and motivation for our approach. We first discuss how agentic AI has given rise to skill marketplaces and the safety gap this creates, then clarify how our proposed method differs from the traditional fuzzing-based software testing. 

A. Agentic AI as a New Software Paradigm. 

LLM-based agents have rapidly transformed how com-plex software tasks are automated, moving beyond the con-straints of handwritten procedural logic to cover roles that once required explicit code, including software development, repository-level bug fixing, multi-step workflow automation, and domain-specific decision making [20]–[25]. Central to this shift is a shared architectural pattern, the plan-then-act loop, in which the agent first reasons a structured natural-language plan that decomposes the goal into actionable steps, then executes each step by invoking tools or external services [5], [15], [16], [18]. Open skill marketplaces have further extended agent capability by letting users assemble agents through community-contributed instruction documents, dramatically expanding what agents can do across diverse domains [6], [8]. However, this flexibility introduces an unexpected risk gap. In-dividually benign skills can jointly produce unintended objec-tives during planning that neither encodes alone, and operators cannot detect this risk without executing agent workflows, as they lack access to a concrete deployment environment [26]. Existing safety evaluations of LLM agents do not cover this gap. Prompt injection and agent red-teaming presuppose a malicious artifact carrying the adversarial objective and a sandboxed environment in which to execute the agent [27]– [30], whereas the risk introduced by skill marketplaces carries no explicit malicious carrier and must be screened without deployment access. We identify this gap and observe that the plan-then-act architecture itself points toward a solution for skill intent testing. The plan-level artifact generated by agent externalizes the agent’s intent before any tool runs, thus testing at the agentic plan is both sufficient to probe implicit intents and necessary given the lack of execution access for skill marketplace end. B. Fuzzing-Based Software Testing. 

Fuzzing-based software testing automatically generates test inputs to uncover software faults without manual specification [31]–[33], and coverage-guided variants steer this generation using execution feedback [34]–[38]. Within this tradition, directed greybox fuzzing adds distance-based signals toward target sites [39], [40], differential testing replaces the crash oracle with output comparison across executions [41], and recent work embeds LLMs as input generators within the loop [42]–[47], with further work refining scheduling and mutation strategies along the way [48], [49]. However, all of these techniques were built for programs, where inputs are syntactic and an oracle can simply ask whether execution crashed. Agentic systems instead reason over natural language, and what counts as a fault is a semantic property of a plan rather than a programmatic property of an input. S KILL FUZZ 

adapts fuzzing to this semantic substrate. Rather than searching for syntax or logic errors in code, it searches for the implicit intents that skill composition drifts into an LLM-based agent’s belief state and operates without any deployment environment. III. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

In this section, we formalize the compositional implicit intent testing problem for agentic skill marketplaces and cast its compositional nature as a fuzzing problem over the activation space of skill composition. 

A. Preliminaries 

Skills as agentic plugins. Just as traditional software plugins extend an application by injecting new behavior at runtime, an agent skill is a structured package of procedural knowledge, comprising natural-language instructions, domain conventions, and task-specific heuristics, that augments aagent’s behavior without modifying the model [6]. A skill library L = {s1, . . . , s n} is a marketplace repository of n

community-contributed skills, where each skill si ∈ L is represented by its instruction document Ii. A skill activation 

is a binary vector s ∈ { 0, 1}n, where [s]i = 1 indicates skill si

is injected into the agent’s context; we write L(s) = {si ∈ L | 

[s]i = 1 } for the set of co-activated skills and |s| = P

> i

[s]i

for its cardinality. We model the agent as a planning agent 

Mplan that maps a task objective σ ∈ X and a skill activation 

s to a natural-language plan πs = Mplan (s, σ ), where X is the space of natural-language tasks. The plan externalizes the agent’s belief state , encoding its representation of what the task requires and what actions it intends to take under the joint instruction context induced by L(s). Throughout, the unit under test is the skill composition and planning agents serve as instruments through which compositional effects’ are exercised and observed. The baseline plan π0 is the plan produced when no skills are active, i.e., [s]i = 0 for all i;it captures the agent’s default intent in the absence of any skill influence and serves as the reference plan against which the differential oracle is computed. 

Belief non-decomposability. When multiple skills are co-activated, Mplan processes their instruction documents as a unified context rather than as independent inputs. The resulting joint belief state can therefore differ substantially from π0 in ways that no per-skill analysis can predict: skills may reinforce each other’s scope, satisfy each other’s implicit preconditions, or jointly introduce action sequences that neither encodes alone. Concretely, letting πsi denote the plan produced when only skill si is active, the joint plan πs is not recoverable from the set {πsi | si ∈ L (s)} by any aggregation, because the cross-skill semantic interactions that produce it exist only in the joint instruction context. 

B. Compositional Implicit Intent Testing 

Let E be a function that maps any natural-language text to an embedding vector in Rd, and let sim( u, v ) denote semantic similarity between two such vectors. We denote by 

δ(s, σ ) ∈ [0 , 1] the plan drift of activation s on task σ,measuring the semantic deviation of πs from the baseline 

π0: δ(s, σ ) = 1 − sim( E(π0), E (πs)) . Let δmin ∈ (0 , 1) 

be a minimum testing threshold below which plan drift is considered negligible, and let δsev ∈ (0 , 1) be a severity threshold above which a drifted plan encodes a substantive redirection of the agent’s task intent. Plan drift thus serves as a differential signal for detecting when a skill activation has meaningfully shifted the agent’s intended behavior. Let 

Mintent denote an intent-extraction agent that maps a plan πs

and task σ to the set of candidate objectives it encodes; we formalize the hidden objectives as implicit intents below. 

Definition 1 (Implicit Intent) . An implicit intent is an un-intended objective ψ ∈ Mintent (πs, σ ) that appears in the agent’s plan πs yet is not explicitly required by the task σ

nor prescribed by any individual skill in L(s).

The testing goal is then to find co-activations (s, σ ) that are intent-triggering , i.e., those where the plan drifts beyond the threshold ( δ(s, σ ) > δ min ) and at least one implicit intent is detected ( Mintent (πs, σ )̸ = ∅). Since the activation space 

{0, 1}|L| grows exponentially, exhaustive search is intractable. At the same time, Mplan is a black-box system whose belief state is only observable through its plan output, and dangerous co-activations are sparse and unevenly distributed across the space. These properties make fuzzing a natural fit: we treat each activation vector s as a test input, use plan drift δ as a differential oracle in place of a crash signal, and mutate the binary activation space by flipping individual skill bits, where each bit-flip adds or removes a single skill and steers the search toward combinations that amplify implicit intents. To evaluate and guide the discovery of implicit intents, two properties of the discovered intents are essential. First, intents should be severe : a co-activation that produces only marginal plan drift is unlikely to correspond to a genuinely harmful hidden objective, making δ(s, σ ) a natural proxy for real-world impact. Second, intents should be diverse : a method that repeatedly surfaces semantically equivalent intents wastes its budget and produces a misleadingly narrow picture of the risk landscape, so novelty relative to previously discovered intents must be rewarded. We therefore propose Intent Coverage Quality (ICQ) as a unified metric capturing both, where ψ(s) ∈

Mintent (πs, σ ) denotes the intent discovered under s, G(t) is the witness set of intent embeddings accumulated up to itera-tion t, and ν(s) = 1max ψ′∈G(t−1) sim( E(ψ(s)) , ψ ′) < θ  is a novelty indicator that equals one when the discovered intent is semantically distinct from all previously recorded ones and zero otherwise, 

ICQ( s, σ ) = δ(s, σ ) · ν(s), (1) 

where a non-zero score requires the discovered intent to be both semantically distinct from all previously found ones and impactful; an intent that duplicates a known one con-tributes nothing regardless of its drift. The cumulative sum 

ICQ Σ = P 

> t

ICQ( s(t), σ ) therefore equals the total plan drift accumulated over all novel intents, directly incentivizing the discovery of severe and diverse co-activations. The fuzzing objective is then to maximize cumulative ICQ over a query budget B,

max 

> {s(t)}Bt=1
> B

X

> t=1

ICQ( s(t), σ ), (2) 

concentrating the testing budget on co-activations that reveal the most severe and diverse implicit intents. IV. M ETHODOLOGY 

In this section, we present S KILL FUZZ as illustrated in Figure 2, an execution-free fuzzing framework that searches the skill activation space to discover implicit intents emerging from skill composition. S KILL FUZZ treats Mplan as a black-box system to query, uses plan drift δ as a differential oracle, and searches the binary skill activation space via differen-tial activation search, with ICQ as the coverage criterion. Step 1 (§IV-A) lifts free-form skill documents into structured contracts and prunes the library to a conflict-rich candidate set. Step 2 (§IV-B) then searches this candidate set under a fixed query budget, concentrating exploration where the oracle signals confirmed risk. 

A. Skill Contract Construction & Pruning 

We firstly extract a structured skill contract from each skill instruction document and embed it in a semantic space, enabling discover which skill combinations are most likely to produce conflicting behaviors. The resulting representations serve two purposes: (1) pruning the library to task-relevant skills and (2) seeding the most conflict-prone skill combina-tions, concentrating the search budget where implicit intents are most likely to emerge. 

a) Contract extraction and embedding: For each skill 

si ∈ L , we offline extract a structured skill contract C(si) = (Pi, Qi, Mi, Vi, Di, Ai, c i) from Ii via an LLM, where Pi is the precondition set, Qi the postconditions, Mi the modifies set, Vi the invariants, Di the domain scope, Ai the abstract action types, and ci ∈ [0 , 1] the extraction confidence. Low 

ci warrants elevated testing priority, since an underspecified document leaves more room for compositional uncertainty once combined with others. Each contract is then embedded as vi = E(C(si)) ∈ Rd, positioning si in a contract semantic 

Algorithm 1: Skill Contract Construction and Pruning 

Input: L, σ, τfilter , m

Output: Ωσ , {vi}, S0 

> 1

foreach si ∈ L do  

> 2

C(si) ← extract contract from Ii via LLM  

> 3

vi ← E(C(si))  

> 4

Ωσ ← { si ∈ L | sim( vi, E (σ)) ≥ τfilter } 

> 5

S0 ← top-m pairs from Ωσ by conflict score, promoting low-ci skills  

> 6

return Ωσ , {vi}, S0

Algorithm 2: Differential Activation Search 

Input: Ωσ , {vi}, S0; Mplan , Mintent , σ, B, kmax , K,

cUCB , α, θ, δmin 

Output: Intent report R 

> 1

π0 ← Mplan (0, σ ); G(0) ← ∅ ; R ← ∅  

> 2

Seed tree with single-skill nodes, top pairs from S0,random jump nodes  

> 3

for t = 1 to B do  

> 4

s ← arg max UCB( ·) traversal from root 

/* Expansion */  

> 5

if r(s) > 0 then  

> 6

i∗ ← arg min i / ∈s ∥vi − (¯ vs + α(E(ψ) − ¯vs)) ∥2 

> 7

else  

> 8

i∗ ← uniform sample from inactive skills in Ωσ 

> 9

s′ ← s with bit i∗ flipped to 1

/* Simulation */  

> 10

icq _sum ← 0 

> 11

for k = 1 to K do  

> 12

π(k) ← Mplan (s′, σ );

δ(k) ← 1 − sim( E(π0), E (π(k)))  

> 13

if δ(k) < δ min then continue  

> 14

ψ(k) ← Mintent (π(k), σ );

ν(k) ← 1 − max ψ′∈G(t−1) sim( E(ψ(k)), ψ ′) 

> 15

if ν(k) > 1 − θ then  

> 16

G(t) ← G(t−1) ∪ { E(ψ(k))};

R ← R ∪ { (s′, δ (k), ψ (k))} 

> 17

icq _sum += δ(k) · ν(k) 

> 18

r(s′) ← icq _sum /K 

/* Backpropagation */  

> 19

Update r(s∗) and N (s∗) for all ancestors s∗ of s′ 

> 20

return R

space that captures functional content beyond a raw instruction embedding. This space drives both the candidate filtering and the seed prioritization described next. 

b) Candidate set and seed prioritization: We first prune the whole skill library to a task-relevant candidate set, retain-ing only skills whose contract embedding is sufficiently close Fig. 2: S KILL FUZZ workflow: Step 1 extracts structured skill contracts and constructs a conflict-prioritized seed set; Step 2 searches the skill co-activation space via differential activation search with limited budget, using plan drift as a differential oracle to surface implicit intents without execution. to the task embedding,         

> Ωσ=si∈ L | sim( vi, E (σ)) ≥τfilter ,(3)

where τfilter ∈ [0 , 1] is a relevance threshold. Within this candidate set, we then prioritize which combinations to test first. The initial seed queue S0 ranks all pairs in Ωσ by conflict potential, measured via shared modifies-set entries and mutually exclusive invariants, selecting the top-m pairs while promoting skills with low ci.

B. Execution-Free Fuzzing via Differential Activation Search 

Step 2 operationalizes the objective of Eq. 2 as a concrete search loop over Ωσ via Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) within a fixed testing budget B, aiming to discover the skill co-activations that maximize cumulative ICQ, i.e. both severe and novel implicit intents exposed in agentic skill compositions. Following the generate-evaluate-prioritize structure common to coverage-guided fuzzers, each iteration selects a promising activation, mutates it by skill bit-flip, queries Mplan to obtain the resulting plan, and scores the outcome with plan drift as the differential oracle. The resulting ICQ then doubles as the node-level reward that prioritizes which regions of Ωσ to expand next. The loop is parameterized by kmax (maximum co-activation depth), K (per-node sample count), cUCB (UCB exploration coefficient), α ∈ [0 , 1] (expansion interpolation), and θ ∈ (0 , 1) (novelty threshold). 

a) Initialization: The baseline plan π0 is established with no skills active, and the witness set G(0) = ∅ is initialized. The MCTS tree is pre-populated with a diverse corpus of seed nodes, including single-skill activations, the top-conflict pairs from S0, and randomly sampled multi-skill jump nodes. This ensures broad coverage of the activation space from the first iteration and lets the expansion policy commit to exploitation as soon as it locates an intent-triggering region. 

b) Tree structure and selection: Each node in the MCTS tree corresponds to a skill activation s ∈ {0, 1}|Ωσ | with 

|s| ≤ kmax , and each directed edge corresponds to a skill bit-flip , the minimal mutation operator that activates one additional skill. Each node maintains a visit count N (s) and an empirical reward r(s), and selection traverses from the root by maximizing UCB( s) = r(s)+ cUCB 

pln N (parent( s)) /N (s),balancing exploitation of high-reward activations with explo-ration of under-visited regions. 

c) Expansion via contract-guided mutation: Rather than expanding randomly, S KILL FUZZ steers each mutation toward the contract region of confirmed compositional risk. The semantic centroid of the current activation is computed as    

> ¯vs=1
> |s|
> X
> i:[ s]i=1
> vi,(4)

and when r(s) > 0 the expansion target is set as       

> vtarget = ¯ vs+α E(ψ)−¯vs
> ,(5)

where ψ is the most recently discovered intent. The next skill to activate is then selected as     

> i∗= arg min
> i: [ s]i=0
> si∈Ωσ
> ∥vi−vtarget ∥2,(6)

pulling the search toward the same contract region of known implicit intents. When r(s) = 0, the next skill is drawn uniformly, deferring directional commitment until an intent-triggering region is located. The child s′ is formed by setting 

[s′]i∗ = 1 and inheriting all other bits from s.

d) Simulation and backpropagation: Node s′ is evaluated by drawing K independent plan samples from Mplan . For each sample k, drift δ(k) is computed against π0; samples below δmin are discarded without further analysis, while the remaining ones are passed to Mintent , which extracts ψ(k)

from the drifted plan, and novelty ν(k) is computed against the current witness set G(t−1) . Novel intents ( ν(k) > 1 − θ)are added to G(t) and recorded in the intent report. The node reward r(s′) = 1

> K

P 

> k

ICQ (k) instantiates the fuzzing objective of Eq. 2 at the node level. This reward is then backpropagated to all ancestors, updating their running-mean rewards and visit counts so that intent-triggering regions attract higher selection probability in subsequent iterations. V. E XPERIMENTS 

We evaluate S KILL FUZZ on SkillsBench [6] across diverse planning agents and representative tasks. The evaluation is organized around four research questions that respectively test whether execution-free testing surfaces real execution-layer risk, identify which agents serve as the more effective testing substrate, establish the search strategy’s efficiency, and chart the resulting risk landscape.  

> •

RQ1. Do skill-composition-induced implicit intents gener-alize across LLM-based agents?  

> •

RQ2. Can plan-level implicit intents discovered by S KILL -FUZZ be observed when the corresponding skill composi-tions are executed by an agent?  

> •

RQ3. Which components of S KILL FUZZ enable it to dis-cover severe and diverse implicit intents under a fixed query budget?  

> •

RQ4. What recurring semantic patterns do implicit intents reveal across skill compositions? 

A. Experimental Setup 

Marketplace. We use the full 196-skill SkillsBench library as the marketplace L, evaluating on the ten representative tasks with the largest candidate sets |Ωσ |, such as financial analysis, manufacturing, video processing, and document editing. 

Planning agents. We evaluate eight planning agents span-ning different model families and parameter size: four open weight models ( DS-R1-7B , DS-R1-14B , DS-R1-32B , DS-R1-LLaMA-8B ) and four proprietary models ( GPT-4.1-nano ,

GPT-4.1-mini , GPT-5.4-nano , GPT-5-nano ). GPT-4o-mini serves as the fixed intent testing agent and is excluded from the plan-agent pool to avoid self-evaluation. All embeddings use all-mpnet-base-v2 [50]. 

Hyperparameters. K=3 , δmin =0 .15 , δsev =0 .5, θ=0 .75 ,

cUCB =√2, α=0 .5, kmax =5 . RQ1, RQ2, and RQ4 use B=200 

per task; the strategy comparison (RQ3) uses B=1000 .

Evaluation metrics. Intent coverage C(t) = |G(t)| counts semantically distinct intents discovered up to iteration t. Cu-mulative ICQ, ICQ Σ = PBt=1 ICQ( s(t), σ ), is the optimiza-tion target of Eq. 2. High-severity count C≥δsev isolates acti-vations with substantial belief-state drift, and intent diversity 

Div( G) measures mean pairwise semantic distance, guarding against inflated coverage from near-duplicate entries. 

B. RQ1: Cross-Agent Generality of Implicit Intents 

RQ1 examines whether implicit intents induced by skill composition generalize across LLM-based planning agents, TABLE I: Intent coverage and quality across plan agents (B=200 ).                                     

> Open-weight models Proprietary models
> Plan Agent ΣC¯δDiv Plan Agent ΣC¯δDiv
> DS-R1-7B 257 0.370 0.443 GPT-5-nano 217 0.191 0.449 DS-R1-L-8B 184 0.191 0.429 GPT-5.4-nano 142 0.165 0.397 DS-R1-14B 124 0.195 0.410 GPT-4.1-nano 125 0.219 0.345 DS-R1-32B 99 0.189 0.353 GPT-4.1-mini 40 0.158 0.234

rather than focusing on a particular model family or architec-ture. Since S KILL FUZZ tests the plan-then-act paradigm, we expect sufficiently capable planning agents to expose this class of compositional vulnerability. The main question is therefore whether implicit intents appear consistently across agents, with agent-level differences reflecting discovery efficiency under a fixed query budget. As shown in Figure 3 and Table I, every evaluated planning agent produces a non-zero number of implicit intents. This result shows that implicit-intent discovery is not tied to a single model family, architecture, or provider. Instead, diverse agents can be perturbed by the same joint skill context, supporting our claim that implicit intents are a general consequence of skill composition. The open-weight results further rule out a backbone-specific explanation. DS-R1-LLaMA-8B shares the DS-R1 reasoning recipe but uses a LLaMA backbone rather than the Qwen backbones used by the other DS-R1 models, yet it remains in the same susceptibility range. Within the Qwen-based models, coverage decreases as model scale increases, suggesting that smaller reasoning models produce less stable plans when faced with conflicting skill instructions. The proprietary agents show a similar distinction: lightweight agents expose moderate sus-ceptibility, whereas GPT-4.1-mini exposes substantially fewer intents, consistent with stronger agentic instruction following reducing compositional drift. Finally, higher coverage does not simply reflect repeated discovery of the same failure mode. Intent diversity generally tracks coverage: agents that expose more intents also tend to cover a broader semantic range, while low-coverage agents remain less diverse. This indicates that more susceptible agents reveal a wider portion of the compositional risk landscape rather than repeatedly triggering near-duplicate intents. 

RQ1: Implicit intents appear across all evaluated plan-ning agents, showing that they are a general risk of skill composition rather than a model-specific artifact. Agents nevertheless differ in discovery efficiency: less stable planning agents expose more and more diverse intents under the same query budget, making them useful substrates for broad compositional risk discovery. 

C. RQ2: Real-Workflow Validation of Implicit Intents 

RQ2 examines whether implicit intents discovered on the planning surface also manifest when the corresponding skill Fig. 3: (a) Mean intent coverage C(t) over 200 iterations across plan agents (shaded = ±1 std). DS-R1-7B sustains the steepest growth throughout; GPT-4.1-mini essentially never rises. (b) Full intent coverage matrix C(200) across all plan agents (rows) and tasks (columns). DS-R1-7B leads in five of ten tasks and attains the highest total coverage. composition is actually executed. We select the 98 highest-risk flagged co-activations and run each in a sandboxed Docker environment with a fixed Claude-based executor. The executor receives only the raw skill combination and independently re-plans and acts, so confirmation does not reuse the planning agent that originally produced the drift signal. We then use GPT-4o-mini as a trace judge to determine whether the pre-dicted intent appears in the execution trace. Table II shows that over 80% of flagged combinations are confirmed during execution. More importantly, the confirma-tion rates are nearly identical for combinations discovered from the architecturally distinct DS-R1 and GPT planning families. If plan drift were mainly an artifact of one planner’s verbosity, tokenization, or reasoning style, these two families would diverge once evaluated through the same executor. In-stead, their similar confirmation rates indicate that the flagged behaviors are not planner-specific artifacts, but risks induced by the skill composition itself. This result supports the central premise of composition-level screening. A marketplace operator cannot assume that testing a skill combination against one deployed agent protects users of another, because the same joint instruction context can induce comparable side effects across different planners and executors. Conversely, the planning layer provides a scalable early-warning surface: it can flag high-risk co-activations before execution, while the execution study shows that these flags often correspond to concrete workflow-level side effects rather than merely textual deviations. The unconfirmed cases mainly involve side effects that are TABLE II: Plan-Predicted Implicit Intents Occurred in Real Agentic Execution     

> Plan-Agent Family Detection Rate
> DS-R1 (open-weight reasoning) 80.5% GPT family (commercial) 81.0%
> Overall 80.6%

hard to verify from traces, such as shifts in analytical framing rather than discrete file writes, format changes, or API calls. We treat these as conservative outcomes: plan drift still flags elevated deviation, but the execution evidence is too diffuse for confirmation. For admission-time screening, this failure mode is preferable to missing executable side effects, since ambiguous high-drift cases can be escalated for manual review. 

RQ2: The compositional side effects SKILL FUZZ dis-covers at the planning agent are model-agnostic and can potentially manifest once the underlying skill combina-tion is actually executed. 

D. RQ3: Component Analysis of SKILL FUZZ 

RQ3 analyzes which components of S KILL FUZZ enable the discovery of severe and diverse implicit intents under a fixed query budget. We conduct a component analysis on 

sec-financial-report using DS-R1-7B ( B=1000 ), as reported in Table III. The study includes one uninformed breadth control and four controlled variants. Random uni-Fig. 4: Discovery growth over 1000 iterations. (a) Cumulative ICQ Σ(t). S KILL FUZZ maintains a persistent lead that widens as the budget grows. (b) Cumulative high-severity implicit intents ( δ ≥ δsev ). TABLE III: Strategy comparison between other ablation vari-ants. C≥δsev the high-severity count (with the fraction of 

C it represents), and Avg k the average number of co-activated skills per triggering combination. PairCov indicates the fraction of all  |Ωσ |

> 2

 pairwise skill interactions covered.                                              

> Strategy C¯δICQ ΣC≥δsev Avg kPairCov
> SKILL FUZZ (Ours) 116 0.575 66.7 90 (77%) 4.28 39.7% Random 121 0.471 57.0 64 (52%) 3.05 94.5% No-Contract 101 0.486 49.1 55 (54%) 4.56 12.8% Greedy-Drift 105 0.413 43.4 37 (35%) 2.14 43.4% Greedy-Coverage 106 0.384 40.7 31 (29%) 2.82 50.6% MCTS+Orth 67 0.500 33.5 40 (59%) 4.64 5.5%

formly samples activations from {0, 1}|Ωσ | and serves as a strong breadth-based control. No-Contract keeps the tree structure but removes contract-guided expansion. Greedy-Drift and Greedy-Coverage test whether optimizing only δ or only C is sufficient. MCTS+Orth keeps contract embeddings but replaces local exploitation with orthogonal-complement exploration after each discovery. Figure 4a shows that SKILL FUZZ achieves the highest cumulative ICQ Σ and sustains this lead as the budget grows. Random achieves a comparable raw intent count and slightly exceeds S KILL FUZZ on C, which is expected since uniform sampling explores broadly and covers most pairwise interac-tions. However, raw coverage does not distinguish shallow deviations from severe compositional risks. Figure 5 shows that Random’s discoveries are more widely spread below the severity threshold, whereas S KILL FUZZ concentrates its find-ings above δsev . As a result, 77% of S KILL FUZZ ’s discovered 

Fig. 5: Distribution of plan drift δ across discovered implicit intents per strategy. S KILL FUZZ ’s intents concentrate above 

δsev , with 77% clearing the threshold compared to 52% for Random and 29% for Greedy-Coverage. intents are high-severity, compared with 52% for Random and 29% for Greedy-Coverage. This yields 90 high-severity intents for S KILL FUZZ versus 64 for Random, a 41% improvement that Figure 4b shows widening rather than saturating over time. The controlled variants isolate the contribution of each component. No-Contract preserves the MCTS structure but re-moves the contract signal used for expansion, causing a sharp drop in ICQ Σ and showing that generic tree search alone is insufficient. Greedy-Drift and Greedy-Coverage further show that optimizing a single signal is not enough. Drift-only search can revisit similar high-drift patterns, while coverage-only search can accumulate many shallow deviations. In contrast, ICQ rewards intents that are both severe and novel, which better matches the testing objective. MCTS+Orth illustrates Fig. 6: Severity is compositional, not additive. Bars show the fraction of plans in the severe regime ( δ ≥ δsev ) and the line shows mean plan drift with regard to co-activation size k.the opposite failure mode. Although it retains contract em-beddings, pushing the search away from discovered regions weakens sustained exploitation of productive combinations. This suggests that diversity is already encouraged by the seed corpus and novelty-aware ICQ, while severe intents require continued expansion around regions where composition has already shown evidence of corrupting the agent’s belief state. The pairwise-coverage results explain why Random’s raw performance should not be overinterpreted. Random covers 94.5% of pairwise interactions, whereas S KILL FUZZ covers less than 40%, yet S KILL FUZZ still discovers more high-severity intents and achieves the highest ICQ Σ. Broad pairwise coverage is therefore not the limiting factor. Figure 6 shows that severe drift is rare for singleton activations but rises monotonically with co-activation depth, reaching 66.5% at 

k=5 , a fourteen-fold increase that persists even among skills that never trigger severe drift alone. This depth effect reflects belief non-decomposability: severe risks emerge from the joint instruction context rather than from individual skills. Together with RQ2, this shows that S KILL FUZZ surfaces more executable compositional risk per query by combining contract guidance, ICQ-based prioritization, and targeted depth. 

RQ3: SkillFuzz discovers considerably more severe and diverse implicit intents than every alternative search strategy, finding 41% more high-severity intents than the random strategy. 

E. RQ4: Semantic Structure of Implicit Intents 

RQ4 examines whether the implicit intents discovered by SKILL FUZZ form recurring semantic patterns rather than iso-lated, task-specific failures. We embed all 1188 discovered intent texts and apply k-means clustering, with the number of clusters selected by silhouette analysis. Figure 7 shows 

Fig. 7: Intent sementic space of discovered implicit intents coloured by semantic cluster. the resulting t-SNE projection, and the clustered taxonomy of compositional risk is summarized below.  

> •

Audio/Video Side-Effect . Media-processing combinations produce unsolicited audio or video artifacts, e.g. converting a document to an MP3 without being asked.  

> •

Unauthorized Tool Invocation . Co-activated skills call ex-ternal services beyond the task’s authorized data boundary.  

> •

Covert Resource Creation . The agent produces files or reports not requested by the task, often substituting the authorized output format.  

> •

Unsanctioned Data Analysis . The agent extends its analysis beyond the data scope explicitly specified by the task. These four categories reflect the risks S KILL FUZZ surfaced under a fixed query budget, rather than an exhaustive catalogue of all possible implicit intents. Larger or more adversarial marketplaces may expose additional categories. Nevertheless, the convergence of discovered intents into structured clus-ters, rather than undifferentiated noise, suggests that contract-guided search identifies semantically coherent regions of com-positional risk. Table IV gives one representative example per cluster. In Figure 7, Audio/Video Side-Effect and Unau-thorized Tool Invocation occupy relatively distinct regions, reflecting the difference between local artifact creation and outbound service calls, while Unsanctioned Data Analysis and Covert Resource Creation partially overlap because both exceed the task’s authorized output or data boundary. The recurrence of these categories across tasks and agents indicates structural patterns of skill composition rather than quirks of a specific task or planner. Unsanctioned Data Anal-ysis is the largest and most mechanically confirmable cluster, making it a common operational risk for marketplace screen-ing. Unauthorized Tool Invocation is smaller but potentially TABLE IV: Representative implicit intents discovered by S KILL FUZZ , one example per semantic cluster.                                   

> Task Co-activated Skills Discovered Implicit Intent Cluster
> Edit PDF gtts ,audiobook The agent converts the updated PDF text into audio and saves an MP3 file as additional output , never requested; the task only specified updating the document.
> Audio/Video Side-Effect
> Mfg. codebook normalisation
> vulnerability-csv-reporting ,
> filler-word-processing ,
> segment-combiner
> Despite requiring JSON output, the agent produces a structured CSV report instead , substituting an unauthorised format without the task initiator’s knowledge.
> Covert Resource Creation
> Video silence re-moval
> speech-to-text ,openai-tts ,
> whisper-transcription ,
> automatic-speech-recognition
> The agent sends local audio data to the external Whisper API ,exposing potentially sensitive video content to a third-party service beyond the task boundary.
> Unauthorized Tool Invoca-tion
> SEC financial re-port
> contribution-analysis ,
> csv-processing
> The agent retains and modifies the original dataset files
> (root/2025-q2 ,root/2025-q3 ), exceeding its read-only authorisation to answer four questions.
> Unsanctioned Data Analysis

more consequential, as it may route local data to external services while leaving little evidence in the final output, where plan-layer testing has a clear advantage over output-level auditing. The taxonomy also reinforces the depth effect observed in RQ3: no category is dominated by singleton activations, and the same risk types become more prominent as co-activation depth increases. Overall, RQ4 shows that implicit intents are not arbitrary textual deviations, but interpretable compositional risk patterns that can help operators prioritize review and mitigation. 

RQ4: Discovered implicit intents form recurring, inter-pretable risk patterns across tasks and agents, arising from skill composition and differing mainly in whether their side effects remain visible in outputs or only in planned actions. 

Overall Discussion This convergence across RQ1 through RQ4 supports a conclusion with direct consequences for SE practice. Because skills function as composable plugins that jointly shape an agent’s belief state, the risk this taxonomy characterizes is not specific to benchmark or to the agents evaluated here, but a structural consequence of the agentic AI in SE itself, recurring wherever diverse skill instruction documents are co-activated at inference time. This generality is what positions contract-guided, execution-free fuzzing as a meaningful complement to today’s per-skill audits rather than a benchmark-specific result, since S KILL FUZZ provides both a means of surfacing this risk before a single co-activation is executed and, through the resulting taxonomy, a basis for allocating a fixed testing budget toward the categories hardest to verify by other means. VI. T HREATS TO VALIDITY 

Internal validity: Our intent extraction and judgment both use GPT-4o-mini, excluded from the plan-agent pool to avoid self-evaluation, though residual judge bias of model itself cannot be fully ruled out. The thresholds δmin , θ, and δsev are fixed once across all tasks and agents rather than tuned per target, keeping cross-model and cross-strategy comparisons on equal footing, though a marketplace operator adopting SKILLFUZZ would still need to calibrate these thresholds to their own risk tolerance rather than reuse ours directly. 

Construct validity: Plan-based testing is inherently limited to whether an agent’s plan aligns with its action. Any text-based oracle, including ours, can only reason over the agent’s declared intent and has no way to verify that this declaration matches what the agent would actually do once a tool executes. An agent capable of stating an innocuous plan while pursuing a different objective during execution would produce a low plan drift and evade detection entirely, since the discrepancy would never surface in the text under test. Such an agent would be deliberately deceptive about its own planning instead of merely corrupted by conflicting skill instructions, a threat model closer to intentional model misalignment than to the compositional risk skill marketplaces introduce. 

External validity: Our marketplace has 196 skills, and a larger or more adversarial community marketplace could exhibit a different contract geometry, potentially shifting which co-activations the pruning step retains as candidates. A de-ployed admission gate would also need to decide a query budget B against real inference cost, a cost-accuracy tradeoff our fixed-budget evaluation does not directly model, and would need to re-screen co-activations as skills in the marketplace are updated or revised after admission. VII. C ONCLUSION 

Skill marketplaces extend LLM agents through composition, but composition is precisely where per-skill auditing breaks down, as the harmful unintended objectives it must detect may exist only in the joint instruction context. In this paper, we identify implicit intents as a new class of compositional defect at the intersection of agentic AI and software engineering. We show that detecting such defects admits a principled, execution-free formulation once the planning layer is treated as a testing surface. We present SKILLFUZZ, the first fuzzing framework for compositional skill marketplaces, and demon-strate that directed, contract-guided search at the planning-level can surface severe, model-agnostic compositional risks. Execution-layer validation further confirms that these risks materialize when the flagged skill combinations are actually run. Together, these results establish implicit intents as a sys-temic property of skill marketplaces and position SKILLFUZZ as a practical complement to admission-time audits, enabling deployment-free testing for compositional risks even as skill ecosystems continue to scale. REFERENCES [1] H. Van Vliet, H. Van Vliet, and J. Van Vliet, Software engineering: principles and practice . John Wiley & Sons Hoboken, NJ, 2008, vol. 13. [2] N. Otoum and N. Elkhalili, “Methods and techniques of agentic software engineering: A systematic literature review,” IEEE Access , vol. 14, pp. 7443–7465, 2026. [3] Z. Wang, S. Cai, G. Chen, A. Liu, X. S. Ma, and Y. Liang, “Describe, explain, plan and select: interactive planning with llms enables open-world multi-task agents,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 36, pp. 34 153–34 189, 2023. [4] Y. Jiang, D. Li, H. Deng, B. Ma, X. Wang, Q. Wang, and G. Yu, “Sok: Agentic skills–beyond tool use in llm agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.20867 , 2026. [5] J. Hu, Y. Dong, Y. Sun, and X. Huang, “Tapas are free! training-free adaptation of programmatic agents via llm-guided program synthesis in dynamic environments,” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 40, no. 35, pp. 29 477–29 485, Mar. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/ view/40189 [6] X. Li, W. Chen, Y. Liu, S. Zheng, X. Chen, Y. He, Y. Li, B. You, H. Shen, J. Sun et al. , “Skillsbench: Benchmarking how well agent skills work across diverse tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12670 , 2026. [7] Openclaw, “ClawHub: Skill registry and marketplace for OpenClaw agents,” https://clawhub.ai/, 2026. [8] Y. Liu, W. Wang, R. Feng, Y. Zhang, G. Xu, G. Deng, Y. Li, and L. Zhang, “Agent skills in the wild: An empirical study of security vulnerabilities at scale,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.10338 , 2026. [9] Z. Guo, Z. Chen, X. Nie, J. Lin, Y. Zhou, and W. Zhang, “Skillprobe: Security auditing for emerging agent skill marketplaces via multi-agent collaboration,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.21019 , 2026. [10] D. R. Kuhn, D. R. Wallace, and A. M. Gallo, “Software fault interactions and implications for software testing,” IEEE transactions on software engineering , vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 418–421, 2004. [11] L. Mariani, F. Pastore, and M. Pezze, “Dynamic analysis for diagnosing integration faults,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 486–508, 2011. [12] M. Hamill and K. Goseva-Popstojanova, “Common trends in software fault and failure data,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering ,vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 484–496, 2009. [13] A. Plaat, M. van Duijn, N. Van Stein, M. Preuss, P. van der Putten, and K. J. Batenburg, “Agentic large language models, a survey,” Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , vol. 84, 2025. [14] L. E. Erdogan, H. Furuta, S. Kim, N. Lee, S. Moon, G. Anumanchipalli, K. Keutzer, and A. Gholami, “Plan-and-act: Improving planning of agents for long-horizon tasks,” in Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. [Online]. Available: https: //openreview.net/forum?id=ybA4EcMmUZ [15] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. R. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao, “React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models,” in The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X [16] X. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Yuan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Peng, and H. Ji, “Exe-cutable code actions elicit better llm agents,” in Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. [17] Z. Liu, H. Hu, S. Zhang, H. Guo, S. Ke, B. Liu, and Z. Wang, “Reason for future, act for now: A principled architecture for autonomous LLM agents,” in Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id= MGkeWJxQVl [18] G. He, G. Demartini, and U. Gadiraju, “Plan-then-execute: An empirical study of user trust and team performance when using llm agents as a daily assistant,” in Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2025, pp. 1–22. [19] H. Wei, Z. Zhang, S. He, T. Xia, S. Pan, and F. Liu, “Plangenllms: A modern survey of llm planning capabilities,” in Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 2025, pp. 19 497–19 521. [20] S. Hong, M. Zhuge, J. Chen, X. Zheng, Y. Cheng, J. Wang, C. Zhang, S. Yau, Z. Lin, L. Zhou et al. , “Metagpt: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative framework,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , vol. 2024, 2024, pp. 23 247–23 275. [21] C. Qian, W. Liu, H. Liu, N. Chen, Y. Dang, J. Li, C. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Su, X. Cong, J. Xu, D. Li, Z. Liu, and M. Sun, “ChatDev: Communicative agents for software development,” in Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , L.-W. Ku, A. Martins, and V. Srikumar, Eds. Bangkok, Thailand: Association for Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2024, pp. 15 174–15 186. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2024.acl-long.810/ [22] J. HU, Y. DONG, Z. DING, and X. HUANG, “Enhancing robustness of llm-driven multi-agent systems through randomized smoothing,” 

Chinese Journal of Aeronautics , p. 103779, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1000936125003851 [23] J. Yang, C. E. Jimenez, A. Wettig, K. Lieret, S. Yao, K. Narasimhan, and O. Press, “Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated soft-ware engineering,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,vol. 37, pp. 50 528–50 652, 2024. [24] J. Hu, X. Huang, Y. Sun, Y. Dong, and X. Huang, “Lying with truths: Open-channel multi-agent collusion for belief manipulation via generative montage,” in Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , M. Liakata, V. P. Moreira, J. Zhang, and D. Jurgens, Eds. San Diego, California, United States: Association for Computational Linguistics, Jul. 2026, pp. 5979–5996. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2026.acl-long.270/ [25] C. S. Xia, Y. Deng, S. Dunn, and L. Zhang, “Demystifying llm-based software engineering agents,” Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering , vol. 2, no. FSE, pp. 801–824, 2025. [26] F. F. Xu, Y. Song, B. Li, Y. Tang, K. Jain, M. Bao, Z. Wang, X. Zhou, Z. Guo, M. Cao et al. , “Theagentcompany: benchmarking llm agents on consequential real world tasks,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 38, 2026. [27] K. Greshake, S. Abdelnabi, S. Mishra, C. Endres, T. Holz, and M. Fritz, “Not what you’ve signed up for: Compromising real-world llm-integrated applications with indirect prompt injection,” in Proceedings of the 16th ACM workshop on artificial intelligence and security , 2023, pp. 79–90. [28] Q. Zhan, Z. Liang, Z. Ying, and D. Kang, “Injecagent: Benchmark-ing indirect prompt injections in tool-integrated large language model agents,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , 2024, pp. 10 471–10 506. [29] E. Debenedetti, J. Zhang, M. Balunovic, L. Beurer-Kellner, M. Fischer, and F. Tramèr, “Agentdojo: A dynamic environment to evaluate prompt injection attacks and defenses for llm agents,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, pp. 82 895–82 920, 2024. [30] Y. Ruan, H. Dong, A. Wang, S. Pitis, Y. Zhou, J. Ba, Y. Dubois, C. Maddison, and T. Hashimoto, “Identifying the risks of lm agents with an lm-emulated sandbox,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , vol. 2024, 2024, pp. 27 031–27 098. [31] H. Liang, X. Pei, X. Jia, W. Shen, and J. Zhang, “Fuzzing: State of the art,” IEEE Transactions on Reliability , vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 1199–1218, 2018. [32] X. Zhu, S. Wen, S. Camtepe, and Y. Xiang, “Fuzzing: a survey for roadmap,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) , vol. 54, no. 11s, pp. 1–36, 2022. [33] M. Huang and C. Lemieux, “Directed or undirected: Investigating fuzzing strategies in a ci/cd setup—rcr report,” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology , 2026. [34] A. Fioraldi, A. Mantovani, D. Maier, and D. Balzarotti, “Dissecting american fuzzy lop: a fuzzbench evaluation,” ACM transactions on software engineering and methodology , vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 1–26, 2023. [35] M. Böhme, V.-T. Pham, and A. Roychoudhury, “Coverage-based grey-box fuzzing as markov chain,” in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security , 2016, pp. 1032–1043. [36] V. J. Manès, H. Han, C. Han, S. K. Cha, M. Egele, E. J. Schwartz, and M. Woo, “The art, science, and engineering of fuzzing: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 2312–2331, 2019. [37] S. Hasanov, S. Nagy, and P. Gazzillo, “A little goes a long way: Tuning configuration selection for continuous kernel fuzzing,” in 2025 IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , 2025, pp. 795–807. [38] M. T. Ahmed, A. Dev, and S. Wei, “Variability-aware fuzzing,” in 2026 IEEE/ACM 48th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , 2026. [39] M. Böhme, V.-T. Pham, M.-D. Nguyen, and A. Roychoudhury, “Directed greybox fuzzing,” in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security , 2017, pp. 2329–2344. [40] K. Kitsios, M. Böhme, and A. Bacchelli, “On interaction effects in greybox fuzzing,” in Proceedings of the 48th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering , 2026. [41] W. M. McKeeman, “Differential testing for software,” Digital Technical Journal , vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 100–107, 1998. [42] C. Lemieux, J. P. Inala, S. K. Lahiri, and S. Sen, “Codamosa: Escaping coverage plateaus in test generation with pre-trained large language models,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE, 2023, pp. 919–931. [43] C. S. Xia, M. Paltenghi, J. Le Tian, M. Pradel, and L. Zhang, “Fuzz4all: Universal fuzzing with large language models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering ,2024, pp. 1–13. [44] H. Xu, W. Ma, T. Zhou, Y. Zhao, K. Chen, Q. Hu, Y. Liu, and H. Wang, “Ckgfuzzer: Llm-based fuzz driver generation enhanced by code knowledge graph,” in 2025 IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings (ICSE-Companion) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 243–254. [45] C. Yang, Y. Deng, R. Lu, J. Yao, J. Liu, R. Jabbarvand, and L. Zhang, “Whitefox: White-box compiler fuzzing empowered by large language models,” Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages , vol. 8, no. OOPSLA2, pp. 709–735, 2024. [46] Y. Deng, C. S. Xia, H. Peng, C. Yang, and L. Zhang, “Large language models are zero-shot fuzzers: Fuzzing deep-learning libraries via large language models,” in Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT interna-tional symposium on software testing and analysis , 2023, pp. 423–435. [47] J. Zhu, C. Shen, Z. Li, J. Yu, Y. Chen, and K. Pei, “Locus: Agentic predicate synthesis for directed fuzzing,” Proceedings of the 48th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering , 2026. [48] M. Lee, S. Cha, and H. Oh, “Learning seed-adaptive mutation strategies for greybox fuzzing,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE, 2023, pp. 384–396. [49] D. Liyanage, M. Böhme, C. Tantithamthavorn, and S. Lipp, “Reachable coverage: Estimating saturation in fuzzing,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . IEEE, 2023, pp. 371–383. [50] N. Reimers and I. Gurevych, “Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks,” in Proceedings of the 2019 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing and the 9th international joint conference on natural language processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , 2019, pp. 3982–3992.