Title: DecoSearch: Complexity-Aware Routing and Plan-Level Repair for Text-to-SQL

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.17821v1

Published Time: Wed, 17 Jun 2026 01:17:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# DecoSearch: Complexity-Aware Routing and Plan-Level Repair for Text-to-SQL 

Esteban Schafir 1, Xu Zheng 1, Hojat Allah Salehi 1, Zhuomin Chen 1, Mo Sha 1, Wei Cheng 2, and Dongsheng Luo 31Florida International University 

> 2

NEC-Labs 

> 3

Singapore Management University 

Abstract 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demon-strated remarkable capabilities in translating natural language to SQL, yet existing meth-ods still falter on complex queries requiring multi-step, data-aware reasoning. We intro-duce DecoSearch, a training-free framework that addresses this by routing each query to the appropriate level of reasoning effort. Alightweight Schema Selector first prunes the full database schema to the relevant tables and columns. An LLM Judger then decides whether the question requires decomposition: straight-forward questions follow a direct generation path and complex ones are escalated to a Di-rected Acyclic Graph (DAG) of atomic sub-questions, each solved by a targeted SQL gen-eration step. A RAG component grounds the decomposer with semantically similar training examples, and a Topology Refiner restructures the reasoning plan when execution failures sig-nal a flawed decomposition rather than a fix-able SQL error. DecoSearch achieves 70.53% execution accuracy on BIRD and 88.31% on Spider with a DeepSeek backbone, surpass-ing all training-free baselines while consuming an order of magnitude fewer tokens than com-peting methods. It also functions as a model-agnostic wrapper, consistently improving fine-tuned SQL generation backbones without any modification to the pipeline. 

1 Introduction 

The conversion of natural language questions into executable SQL (Text-to-SQL) is a fundamental challenge at the intersection of natural language understanding and database systems (Katsogiannis-Meimarakis and Koutrika, 2023; Luo et al., 2025; Yu et al., 2018; Li et al., 2023). The advent of Large Language Models (LLMs) has marked a new era of capability in this domain, enabling zero-shot or few-shot translation with impressive fluency (Ra-jkumar et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2024; Pourreza and Rafiei, 2023; Talaei et al., 2024). However, the performance of these models degrades significantly when confronted with complex questions, those requiring nested queries, multi-step logical infer-ence, or an awareness of the database’s underlying content and structure (Li et al., 2023, 2024), or large databases with multiple tables that requires complex SQL queries with multiple JOIN opera-tions (Yu et al., 2018; Li et al., 2024). For these problems, a single-pass, autoregressive generation process is often insufficient (Scholak et al., 2021; Pourreza and Rafiei, 2023; Talaei et al., 2024; Pour-reza et al., 2024), as it fails to explore the vast combinatorial space of possible SQL queries and cannot recover from early generation errors. Recent work has attacked this brittleness from several angles. Decomposition-based methods break a complex question into simpler sub-problems, improving the tractability of each step (Pourreza and Rafiei, 2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Eyal et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2025a; Xie et al., 2024). Self-refinement approaches use ex-ecution feedback to iteratively debug generated SQL (Madaan et al., 2023; Gou et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Askari et al., 2025; Zhai et al., 2025). Multi-candidate frameworks generate diverse SQL candidates and select the best one (Wang et al., 2023; Pourreza et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2025; Borchmann and Wydmuch, 2025). Complexity-aware routing strategies allocate differ-ent pipelines to queries of different difficulty (Zhu et al., 2025; Guo et al., 2025). Each of these strate-gies addresses a real failure mode, but each op-erates at a single level of the problem. A self-debugging system can fix a syntactic error in a SQL query, but it cannot recognize that the under-lying reasoning plan was flawed. A decomposition system can produce a sensible plan, but if one sub-problem turns out to be unsolvable as posed, it has no mechanism to revise its own plan. A multi-candidate system offers breadth, but it does not 

> arXiv:2606.17821v1 [cs.AI] 16 Jun 2026

adaptively concentrate its computational budget on the most promising direction. We observe that failures in complex Text-to-SQL generation are not monolithic. They arise from qualitatively different root causes that de-mand different interventions. Some failures are 

implementation-level : the SQL contains a bug such as a wrong join condition or an incorrect filter, and an LLM debugger equipped with execution feedback can repair it directly. Other failures are 

strategy-level : the chosen SQL formulation style (e.g., nested subqueries versus CTEs) is a poor fit for the problem, and a structurally different ap-proach would succeed where iterative debugging of the current one would not. Still other failures are plan-level : the high-level reasoning plan itself is flawed, a dependency is missing, or the decom-position is too coarse, and no amount of SQL-level repair can compensate. Existing methods typically address at most one of these failure types. No cur-rent Text-to-SQL framework systematically diag-noses the level at which a failure occurs and routes it to the appropriate repair mechanism. We introduce DecoSearch, a training-free frame-work that organizes Text-to-SQL generation as a multi-stage adaptive workflow with hierarchical failure routing. The framework employs a Judger-led escalation strategy: for every question, a spe-cialized LLM judger evaluates whether the query can be solved directly or requires structural decom-position. For manageable questions, the system follows a Direct Path that generates and executes a single SQL query, keeping latency and cost low. For queries judged as complex, DecoSearch esca-lates to the plan level, decomposing the question into a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG). Each sub-question is solved independently, and persistent ex-ecution failures at the query level trigger automatic topology refinement to restructure the reasoning plan. This ensures computational resources are spent proportionally to the depth of the failure. Our primary contributions are as follows: • We identify that failures in complex Text-to-SQL arise at distinct levels of abstraction (implemen-tation, strategy, and planning) and introduce a hierarchical failure-routing architecture with a Judger-led direct path that efficiently resolves manageable queries while routing genuinely com-plex ones to structured decomposition. • We introduce a plan-level repair mechanism that identifies persistent query failures as signs of a flawed decomposition, automatically restruc-turing the reasoning DAG in response. Eval-uating on the BIRD and Spider benchmarks, DecoSearch achieves execution accuracies of 70.53% and 88.31%, respectively. Without any supervised fine-tuning, it successfully recovers a significant portion of the queries where direct generation baselines fail. 

2 Related Work 

Text-to-SQL with LLMs. Early Text-to-SQL sys-tems relied on semantic parsing and schema-aware neural encoders (Wang et al., 2020; Cai and Wan, 2020). The rise of large-scale LLMs shifted the paradigm toward in-context learning, enabling strong zero-shot and few-shot performance (Ra-jkumar et al., 2022; Gao et al., 2024). However, single-pass generation remains brittle on complex queries requiring multi-table joins or data-aware reasoning (Li et al., 2023, 2024), a challenge made even more acute by newer, harder benchmarks such as Spider 2.0 (Lei et al., 2025), which features enterprise-scale databases where state-of-the-art models achieve below 25% accuracy. 

Decomposition-based Methods. A natural re-sponse to this brittleness is to decompose com-plex questions into simpler sub-problems (Zhou et al., 2023; Pourreza and Rafiei, 2023; Eyal et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2025a). DIN-SQL (Pour-reza and Rafiei, 2023) pioneered decomposed in-context learning with self-correction for Text-to-SQL. DEA-SQL (Xie et al., 2024) introduces a workflow-based paradigm that counters attention diffusion in monolithic prompting through sequen-tial filtering, classification, and correction stages. Our work extends these ideas by formalizing the decomposition as a dependency DAG and enabling plan-level repair when sub-problems fail. 

Schema Linking. Passing the full database schema to every LLM call degrades generation quality and inflates cost. CHESS (Talaei et al., 2024) inte-grates LLM-driven schema pruning as a dedicated agent. RSL-SQL (Cao et al., 2024) further im-proves schema linking with bidirectional pruning, achieving high recall while cutting input columns substantially. DecoSearch’s schema selector fol-lows this paradigm, applying LLM-driven keyword extraction and two-stage table and column selec-tion before any generation call. 

Self-Refinement and Execution Feedback. Several methods improve robustness by iteratively revis-Inputs  Schema Selector     

> (Pruning)
> Judger
> (Decision Gate)
> Decomposer
> DAG of Sub -Question Topology Refiner
> Lower -Level Sub -Question Solving
> Materialization
> Natural
> Language
> Question
> Database
> Schema
> Question
> Is Direct Path?
> Q1
> Q0
> Q2
> Q3
> Q3
> Q3’ Q3’’
> Full Schema Relevant
> Sub -schema
> Make sub -questions
> less ambiguous
> Direct Path
> (Simple Task)
> Decomposition Path
> (Complex Task)
> No
> Yes
> Parallel Candidate Generation Execution
> SQL Generator
> Result SQL Query
> Executed
> correctly?
> Result
> Yes
> Final result or Temp. table
> No

Figure 1: The pipeline begins with Pre-Processing via evidence-aware schema pruning. A Judger determines if the question is manageable; if so, the Direct Path generates and executes a single SQL query and exits if successful. Otherwise, the Decomposer produces a DAG of atomic sub-questions linked by @[n] dependency placeholders. At the Sub-Question Solving stage, each node is executed in topological order; upstream results are resolved as inline value lists for small result sets or materialized as temporary tables for large ones before the downstream SQL is generated. Persistent execution failures trigger the Topology Refiner to rewrite the DAG and retry. 

ing SQL using execution feedback (Madaan et al., 2023; Gou et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Askari et al., 2025). ExCoT (Zhai et al., 2025) extends this with execution-supervised fine-tuning, iteratively improving open-source models using only SQL execution accuracy as the reward signal. These ap-proaches address implementation-level failures but cannot restructure an incorrect reasoning plan. De-coSearch complements this by operating at the plan level: when execution feedback reveals a flawed decomposition, the system rewrites the DAG rather than patching individual queries. 

Multi-Candidate, Routing, and Test-Time Scal-ing. CHASE-SQL (Pourreza et al., 2024) gener-ates diverse candidates via multiple CoT strate-gies and selects the best via a fine-tuned pairwise ranker. Agentar-Scale-SQL (Wang et al., 2025b) combines RL, refinement, and parallel synthesis at the query level. CHESS (Talaei et al., 2024) and MCS-SQL (Lee et al., 2025) use self-consistency voting over multiple candidates; Query and Con-quer (Borchmann and Wydmuch, 2025) shows that execution-guided selection alone enables smaller models to match much larger ones. Complexity-aware routing has also emerged as a practical tool: EllieSQL (Zhu et al., 2025) routes queries to dif-ferent generation pipelines based on estimated dif-ficulty, achieving substantial token savings, while Rethinking Agentic Workflows (Guo et al., 2025) benchmarks test-time scaling strategies for Text-to-SQL and finds that routing and decomposition consistently outperform naive candidate scaling. DecoSearch uses a Judger-led routing strategy to select between direct generation and hierarchical decomposition, reserving the structured DAG ap-proach for queries requiring deeper reasoning. 

3 Methodology 

3.1 Problem Formulation 

Given a natural language question Q, a database D

with schema S, and optionally a set of domain hints (“evidence”), our goal is to produce an SQL query 

ˆQ such that Execute ( ˆQ, D) = Execute (Q∗, D),where Q∗ is the ground-truth query. We evaluate correctness via execution accuracy (EX): a query is correct if and only if its result set semantically matches the gold result set. 

3.2 Overview 

DecoSearch treats Text-to-SQL generation as an adaptive, multi-level reasoning process. Rather than committing every question to the same gen-eration procedure, the system first assesses query complexity and routes each question to the cheapest path that is likely to succeed. For straightforward questions, a direct generation attempt is sufficient. For complex questions, those requiring multi-table joins, nested logic, or multi-step inference; the sys-tem escalates to a structured decomposition that breaks the question into a DAG of simpler, inde-pendently solvable sub-questions. Failures are di-agnosed and repaired at the appropriate level of abstraction: when a node’s SQL fails to execute, the system signals a flawed reasoning plan and trig-gers topology refinement of the DAG. The entire framework is training-free and operates at test-time, relying solely on the reasoning capabilities of an off-the-shelf LLM. Our proposed framework consists of five primary components: (1) a Schema Selector that prunes the database schema to the most relevant tables before any LLM call, (2) a Judger-Led Escalation strategy that determines the appropriate reasoning depth, (3) a Direct Path for manageable questions, (4) a Query-Level SQL Generation step for sub-problem solving, and (5) a Hierarchical Control Loop for dynamic topology refinement. This tiered approach ensures that computational resources are allocated proportionally to the complexity of the question, with decomposition reserved for queries the Judger identifies as complex. The full pipeline is given in Figure 1. We describe each component below. 

3.3 Schema Selection 

Real-world databases often contain dozens of ta-bles and hundreds of columns, the vast majority of which are irrelevant to any given question. Passing the full schema to every LLM call wastes tokens, inflates cost and, more critically, degrades gener-ation quality by filling the context with distract-ing schema noise. DecoSearch therefore applies a lightweight schema pruning step before any LLM call in the pipeline. Our Schema Selector follows the schema-pruning approach introduced in CHESS (Talaei et al., 2024) and DeepEye-SQL (Li et al., 2026), and is consistent with the bidirectional pruning principles of RSL-SQL (Cao et al., 2024), adapt-ing their keyword-based filtering strategy to our pipeline. The Schema Selector operates in two stages. First, it issues a single LLM call to extract a set of task-relevant keywords and entities from the NLQ and the evidence string (e.g., column names, value filters, domain terms). Second, it uses those keywords to drive an LLM-based table selection call, followed by a column selection call within the chosen tables. Only the selected tables and their columns are serialized into the schema string passed to the Judger, Decomposer, SQL Generator, and Topology Refiner. This pruning reduces prompt length by up to an order of magnitude for large databases and focuses the LLM’s attention on relevant schema elements; the ablation study (§4.3) confirms its impact on both accuracy and token cost. 

3.4 Judger-Led Escalation and Direct Path 

The pipeline begins with a specialized LLM Judger that evaluates the complexity of the natural lan-guage question (NLQ) relative to the database schema. The Judger is a single zero-shot LLM call that receives two inputs: (1) the NLQ and (2) the pruned database schema produced by the preceding schema-selection step. It outputs a structured JSON object of the form {"needs_decomposition": true/false, "reasoning": "..."} , providing both a binary routing decision and a brief rationale. The Judger prefers the direct path by default, es-calating to decomposition only for questions with conflicting aggregation grains, extreme join com-plexity, multi-phase reasoning where step two de-pends on a materialized result from step one, or evidence-driven formulas that would make a single query excessively nested. This routing philoso-phy is consistent with recent work on complexity-aware allocation (Zhu et al., 2025; Guo et al., 2025), which shows that matching computational effort to query difficulty yields significant accuracy and efficiency gains over uniform strategies. When decomposition is not needed, the pipeline proceeds directly to the Direct Path described be-low; when it is, the system skips the direct path and proceeds to DAG-based decomposition. For questions judged as manageable, the sys-tem follows a Direct Path: a single SQL query is generated using a zero-temperature LLM call and executed against the database. If execution suc-ceeds, the result is returned immediately, keeping both latency and cost low. If execution fails, the framework falls through to the decomposition stage, which systematically breaks the original query into a sequence of simpler, more verifiable sub-tasks. 

3.5 Plan-Level Search: Task Decomposition 

When the Judger mandates escalation or the direct path fails to execute, the system initiates an upper-level plan by decomposing the complex NLQ into a DAG. In this graph, nodes represent simpler, atomic sub-questions, and directed edges represent data dependencies between them. The topologi-cal order of the graph determines the execution sequence, ensuring that each node’s inputs are fully materialized before it executes. Figure 2: DAG for the thrombosis_prediction exam-ple. Node 2 executes last, injecting results of Nodes 0 and 1 via @[n] placeholders. 

Example 1. Consider the following question from the BIRD benchmark: 

“List all patients who were followed up at the outpatient clinic who underwent a laboratory test in October 1991 and had a total blood bilirubin level within the normal range.” 

The Decomposer breaks this into the three-node DAG shown in Figure 2. Nodes 0 and 1 are in-dependent and can be solved in parallel; Node 2 consumes both their results. The @[n] syntax is a dependency placeholder: at execution time, the result set of Node n is resolved and injected into the downstream node’s prompt and SQL before generation. For small result sets ( ≤100 rows), val-ues are inlined as a SQL value list (e.g., an IN (. . . ) literal); for larger result sets, the upstream result is materialized into a SQLite temporary table (temp_ds_node_n ), which the downstream node can query by name. This design prevents the LLM from having to express the full multi-table logic in a single query while remaining efficient regardless of result cardinality (see Appendix A.3 for details). To improve the logical soundness of this initial decomposition, we employ a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) strategy. Before generating the graph, the system retrieves a set of successful question-decomposition pairs from a pre-populated knowledge base. These examples are dynamically injected into the decomposer’s prompt as few-shot demonstrations, grounding the LLM in relevant, structured examples and guiding it toward more coherent and viable task graphs. The knowledge base is constructed offline from prior successful runs on the benchmark’s train-ing split: experiment logs are parsed to extract question–sub-question pairs for which the pipeline produced a correct final answer, and these are stored as a JSONL file. At inference time, we encode the incoming question using a sentence em-bedding model (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019) and retrieve the k = 3 most similar training examples by cosine similarity. 

3.6 Query-Level SQL Generation 

For each node in the decomposition graph, the system generates a single SQL query using a zero-temperature LLM call (full prompt in Ap-pendix C.3). The prompt instructs the model to produce a valid SQL query grounded in the pruned schema and any available evidence hints, while applying standard robustness conventions such as case-insensitive string comparisons. The gener-ated query is executed against the database; if it succeeds, its result is materialized and passed to downstream nodes via the @[n] placeholder mech-anism. If execution fails, the node signals failure to the Hierarchical Control loop, which then decides whether to trigger topology refinement. The full pipeline is described in Algorithm 1. 

3.7 Hierarchical Control: Dynamic Topology Refinement 

To improve resilience against flawed initial de-compositions, DecoSearch maintains a hierarchical feedback loop that enables dynamic plan correc-tion at the graph level. This mechanism allows the system to recover from cases where the decomposi-tion strategy itself is the root cause of failure, rather than individual SQL generation. 

Trigger Condition. Topology refinement is trig-gered when the generated SQL at a given node fails to execute successfully. This signals that the sub-question may be ill-formed, overly broad, or structurally inconsistent with the available schema; problems that cannot be resolved by regenerating a query for the same sub-question. 

Action and Resumption. Upon receiving the failure signal, the framework activates the Topol-ogy Refiner module that provides the LLM with the current DAG structure, the failing node’s sub-question, and the execution error from the failed query. The LLM’s task is to produce a revised DAG, which may involve re-partitioning dependen-cies, inserting intermediate nodes to break down an overly complex sub-question, or restructuring the data-flow to better align with the schema. The pipeline then adopts the revised graph and resumes execution from the first modified node, preserving the results of all unaffected upstream nodes. Re-finement is bounded by a budget B (the maximum number of topology refinement attempts per query). If the revised DAG also fails to execute and the budget is exhausted, the system accepts the best available result for the failing node and continues execution of all downstream nodes. This grace-ful degradation ensures that a single irresolvable sub-problem does not abort the entire pipeline. 

4 Experiments 

We conduct empirical evaluations to assess the per-formance of our proposed framework. The exper-iments are designed to answer three primary re-search questions: (1) How does our hierarchical search framework compare against state-of-the-art 

Algorithm 1 DecoSearch Pipeline                                                                                             

> Require: Natural Language Question Q,Database D,Schema S
> Ensure: Final SQL Result R
> 1: { Step 1: Schema Selection }2: Spruned ←SchemaSelector (Q, S)
> 3: { Step 2: Judger — Direct Path or Decompose }4: if Judger( Q, Spruned ) is Direct Path then
> 5: ˆQ←SQLGenerator (Q, Spruned )
> 6: R, Error ←Execute (D,ˆQ)
> 7: if Error =NONE then
> 8: return R{Direct execution succeeded} 9: end if
> 10: {Execution failed: fall through to decomposition} 11: end if
> 12: { Step 3: Decomposition }13: G←Decomposer (Q, Spruned ){DAG of sub-questions} 14: Queue ←TopologicalSort (G)
> 15: Results ← {}
> 16: { Step 4: Hierarchical Control & Materialization }17: while Queue is not empty do
> 18: n←Queue. pop (0)
> 19: Qsub ←Substitute (n.question, Results )
> 20: ˆQsub ←SQLGenerator (Qsub ,Spruned )
> 21: Rsub ,Error ←Execute (D,ˆQsub )
> 22: if Error ̸=NONE then
> 23: G←TopologyRefiner (G, n, Error )
> 24: if Gis revised then
> 25: Queue ←TopologicalSort (G)
> 26: continue
> 27: end if
> 28: end if
> 29: Results [n]←Materialize (D,ˆQsub , R sub )
> 30: end while
> 31: return Results [final ]

(SOTA) Text-to-SQL models and (2) how much does this approach reduce token usage and cost compared to standard methods? (3) Can the pro-posed method be combined with fine-tune models to improve accuracy? 

Datasets. We evaluate on two standard bench-marks. Spider (Yu et al., 2018) contains 2,147 testing queries across 200 databases. It empha-sizes structural SQL complexity (multi-table joins, nested queries). BIRD (Li et al., 2023) contains 1,534 development queries across 11 databases de-signed to test “data-aware” reasoning, requiring the model to understand actual database content (e.g., value distributions, cell-level patterns). 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

Our experimental setup is defined as follows. 

Baselines. Our method is tested with two cat-egories of baselines: Training-Free and Fine-tuned methods. Training-free methods operate solely via prompting without any task-specific fine-tuning, including CHESS (Talaei et al., 2024), GenaSQL (Dönder et al., 2025), and DAIL-SQL (Gao et al., 2024). Fine-tuned methods addi-tionally train or adapt model weights on Text-to-SQL data, including XiYan-SQL (Liu et al., 2026), Agentar-Scale-SQL (Wang et al., 2025b), CHASE-SQL (Pourreza et al., 2024), and OmniSQL (Li et al., 2025). Because our approach focuses on test-time reasoning strategy, query routing, structured decomposition, and plan-level repair, rather than on model parameters or training data, it is orthogo-nal to these fine-tuned methods and can be readily combined with them to yield further improvements. 

Implementation Details. Our framework is model-agnostic. For all experiments reported in this paper, all LLM-driven components (Judger, Decomposer, SQL Generator, Topology Refiner) use DeepSeek as the backbone model with a single greedy gen-eration per node. All LLM calls are cached to en-sure full reproducibility. SQL Generator prompts are lightly adapted per dataset to reflect dataset-specific conventions: the BIRD prompt enforces case-insensitive string comparisons (via LOWER() )and treats the evidence string as ground truth, while the Spider prompt emphasizes column examples present in the schema. The core reasoning struc-ture is identical across both. Full hyperparameter settings are reported in Appendix B. 

Evaluation Metric. The primary metric is Execu-tion Accuracy. A generated SQL query is deemed Table 1: Comprehensive comparison of Text-to-SQL frameworks on BIRD and Spider benchmarks, categorized by learning approach. “Model Avail.” indicates whether model weights are publicly available. 

Learning Method Model BIRD EX (%) Spider EX (%) Approach Avail. dev dev 

Training-free DeepEye-SQL × 68.51 84.44 GenaSQL × 65.32 81.93 CHESS × 69.60 87.33 DAIL-SQL × 59.39 83.56 DIN-SQL × 39.57 64.51 Open-source GPT-OSS-120b ✓ 66.16 84.16 GPT-OSS-20b ✓ 64.21 83.09 Llama-4-Maverick-17B ✓ 67.27 85.42 Mistral-nemotron-12B ✓ 61.73 81.93 Qwen2.5-7B ✓ 39.96 77.27 DeepSeek – 66.81 85.56 

DecoSearch (ours) – 70.53 88.31 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7 10 8

> Cumulative Token Usage (log scale)
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> Cumulative Execution Accuracy (EX %)  DecoSearch
> CHESS
> GenaSQL
> DeepEye
> DAIL-SQL
> DIN-SQL

(a) BIRD 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7 10 8 

> Cumulative Token Usage (log scale)
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> Cumulative Execution Accuracy (EX %)  DecoSearch
> CHESS
> GenaSQL
> DeepEye
> DAIL-SQL
> DIN-SQL

(b) Spider Figure 3: Cumulative Execution Accuracy vs. Cumulative Token Usage (log scale) on BIRD (a) and Spider (b). DecoSearch reaches its final accuracy with fewer tokens than all compared methods on both benchmarks, demonstrating superior token efficiency. 

correct if and only if its execution result set is identi-cal to that of the ground-truth query. Result sets are canonicalized to be robust against arbitrary row and column ordering, as well as known surface-level formatting artifacts (e.g., concatenated vs. separate string tokens that convey the same information). 

4.2 Results and Analysis Overall Performance. Evaluation results are summarized in Table 1. On BIRD and Spider, De-coSearch achieves 70.53% and 88.31% EX, respec-tively, consistently outperforming all training-free baselines. These findings validate that our primary performance gains stem from the hierarchical de-composition and the Judger-led routing strategy. 

Token Efficiency. Figure 3 plots cumulative EX accuracy against cumulative token usage (log scale) for all methods. DecoSearch is consistently the leftmost high-accuracy curve on both benchmarks, demonstrating that it reaches its peak accuracy with fewer tokens than every compared method. On BIRD, DecoSearch converges near 2×10 6 tokens; CHESS requires approximately 2×10 7 tokens to reach a comparable accuracy, a 10 × overhead. On Spider, DecoSearch achieves 88.31% at roughly 

2×10 6 tokens, a budget at which most baselines remain below 60% cumulative accuracy. This ef-ficiency advantage is a direct consequence of the Judger-Led Escalation strategy: the majority of queries are resolved via the direct path, and the ex-pensive decomposition machinery is invoked only for the fraction of queries that genuinely require it. 

DecoSearch as a General-Purpose Wrapper for Fine-Tuned Models. A key property of De-coSearch is that its hierarchical search framework is entirely model-agnostic: the backbone LLM XiYanSQL-7B 

> GPT-5-mini
> CSC-SQL-7B
> OmniSQL-7B
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> Execution Accuracy on BIRD dev (%)
> 45.91
> 59.32
> 48.31
> 38.72
> 56.58
> 64.93
> 56.13
> 42.24
> +10.67pp
> +5.61pp
> +7.82pp
> +3.52pp
> DirectSQL
> DecoSearch (ours)

(a) Fine-tuned backbones Qwen2.5-7b-Instruct          

> mistral-nemotron-12b
> llama-4-maverick-17b
> GPT-OSS-20b
> GPT-OSS-120b
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> Execution Accuracy on BIRD dev (%)
> 39.96
> 61.73
> 67.27 64.21 66.16
> 39.96
> 67.21 69.36 67.99 70.46
> +0.00pp
> +5.48pp +2.09pp +3.78pp +4.30pp
> DirectSQL
> DecoSearch (ours)

(b) Open-source backbones Figure 4: Execution Accuracy on BIRD when pairing DecoSearch with fine-tuned (a) and open-source (b) backbone models, compared against their DirectSQL baseline. DecoSearch consistently improves over the direct generation baseline regardless of the backbone, demonstrating its model-agnostic nature. 

can be swapped without any modification to the pipeline. To demonstrate this, we pair DecoSearch with several SOTA fine-tuned SQL generation mod-els and evaluate on BIRD. Figure 4 shows that DecoSearch consistently improves over the corre-sponding DirectSQL baseline for every backbone, with gains of +10 .67 pp (XiYanSQL-7B), +5 .61 

pp (GPT-5-mini), and +3 .52 pp (OmniSQL-7B), where pp denotes percentage points. These results confirm that DecoSearch’s decomposition and rout-ing strategy is complementary to model-level fine-tuning: it provides an additional layer of structured reasoning on top of whatever SQL generation ca-pability the backbone already possesses, and can therefore be applied as a drop-in enhancement to any existing fine-tuned system. 

4.3 Ablation Study 

To quantify the contribution of each component, we conduct an ablation study on a 770-query subset of BIRD, using DeepSeek as the backbone, shown in Table 2. The Judger is the dominant component: forcing all queries through decomposition causes the largest drop ( −10 .65 pp), revealing that DAG decomposition actively hurts simple queries. The Judger’s role is to prevent from over-engineering. The schema selector is the second most impactful component ( −1.82 pp), while also inflating token cost 6.3× when removed. Removing decomposi-tion entirely costs only −1.43 pp, confirming it targets a small but consequential subset. Topology refinement provides an additional incremental gain (−0.78 pp), with the primary benefit coming from routing and hierarchical decomposition. 

Table 2: Ablation study on BIRD (dev). Each row removes one component from the full DecoSearch pipeline. ∆ EX is the absolute change in Execution Accuracy relative to the full system.                    

> Configuration EX (%) ∆EX Tokens ( ×10 6)
> Full Pipeline 69.48 —2.9 w/o Judger (always decompose) 58.83 −10.65 2.0 w/o Decomposition (direct path only) 68.05 −1.43 1.8 w/o Topology Refinement 68.70 −0.78 2.5 w/o Schema Selector 67.66 −1.82 18.1

5 Conclusion 

We presented DecoSearch, a training-free frame-work that adaptively matches computational effort to query difficulty by routing each question through a Judger-Led Escalation strategy: simple queries are resolved via direct generation, while complex ones are escalated to a DAG decomposition process with automatic Topology Refinement. DecoSearch achieves 70.53% execution accuracy on BIRD and 88.31% on Spider, surpassing all training-free base-lines and outperforming several fine-tuned systems on Spider, while consuming an order of magnitude fewer tokens than methods such as CHESS. The ab-lation study confirms that Judger-led routing is the dominant contributor ( −10 .65 pp when disabled), underscoring that DecoSearch’s value lies in the principled orchestration of routing, decomposition, and plan-level repair. 6 Limitations 

DecoSearch relies on executable database feedback during inference. The topology refiner is triggered by SQL execution errors at individual DAG nodes, which assumes that queries can be executed against the target database and that execution failures are informative signals of plan level flaws. This as-sumption is common across most training free Text-to-SQL methods that incorporate self-refinement or candidate selection, since execution feedback is the strongest unsupervised signal available at test time. For settings where execution is unavailable, pro-hibitively expensive, or returns semantically wrong but syntactically valid results, DecoSearch, like other execution guided methods, cannot intervene. Nevertheless, the framework remains applicable to any setting where SQL can be executed against the target database, which covers all standard Text to SQL benchmarks and the majority of deployed analytical workloads. 

References 

Arian Askari, Christian Poelitz, and Xinye Tang. 2025. MAGIC: Generating Self-Correction Guideline for In-Context Text-to-SQL. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) .Łukasz Borchmann and Marek Wydmuch. 2025. Query and Conquer: Execution-Guided SQL Generation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.24364 .Yitao Cai and Xiaojun Wan. 2020. IGSQL: Database Schema Interaction Graph Based Neural Model for Context-Dependent Text-to-SQL Generation. In 

2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .Zhenbiao Cao, Yuanlei Zheng, Zhihao Fan, Xiaojin Zhang, Wei Chen, and Xiang Bai. 2024. RSL-SQL: Robust Schema Linking in Text-to-SQL Generation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.00073 .Xinyun Chen, Maxwell Lin, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. 2024. Teaching Large Language Mod-els to Self-Debug. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Yusuf Denizay Dönder, Derek Hommel, Andrea W Wen-Yi, David Mimno, and Eun Seo Jo. 2025. Cheaper, Better, Faster, Stronger: Robust Text-to-SQL without Chain-of-Thought or Fine-Tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14174 .Ben Eyal, Moran Mahabi, Ophir Haroche, Amir Bachar, and Michael Elhadad. 2023. Semantic Decomposi-tion of Question and SQL for Text-to-SQL Parsing. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 .Dawei Gao, Haibin Wang, Yaliang Li, and 1 others. 2024. Text-to-sql empowered by large language mod-els: A benchmark evaluation. In Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , volume 17. Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, and 1 others. 2024. Critic: Large language models can self-correct with tool-interactive critiquing. In International Con-ference on Learning Representations .Jiajing Guo, Kenil Patel, Jorge Piazentin Ono, Wenbin He, and Liu Ren. 2025. Rethinking Agentic Work-flows: Evaluating Inference-Based Test-Time Scal-ing Strategies in Text-to-SQL Tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10885 .Arthur B. Kahn. 1962. Topological sorting of large networks. Communications of the ACM , 5(11):558– 562. George Katsogiannis-Meimarakis and Georgia Koutrika. 2023. A survey on deep learning approaches for text-to-SQL. The VLDB Journal , 32:905–936. Dongjun Lee, Choongwon Park, Jaehyuk Kim, and Heesoo Park. 2025. MCS-SQL: Leveraging Multi-ple Prompts and Multiple-Choice Selection for Text-to-SQL Generation. International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING) .Fangyu Lei, Jixuan Chen, Yuxiao Ye, Ruisheng Cao, Dongchan Shin, Hongjin Su, and 1 others. 2025. Spi-der 2.0: Evaluating Language Models on Real-World Enterprise Text-to-SQL Workflows. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Boyan Li, Chong Chen, Zhujun Xue, Yinan Mei, and Yuyu Luo. 2026. DeepEye-SQL: A Software-Engineering-Inspired Text-to-SQL Framework. In 

ACM Special Interest Group on Management of Data (SIGMOD) .Boyan Li, Yuyu Luo, Chengliang Chai, Guoliang Li, and Nan Tang. 2024. The dawn of natural language to SQL: Are we fully ready? Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 17(11):3318–3331. Haoyang Li, Shang Wu, Xiaokang Zhang, Xinmei Huang, Jing Zhang, Fuxin Jiang, Shuai Wang, Tiey-ing Zhang, Jianjun Chen, Rui Shi, Hong Chen, and Cuiping Li. 2025. OmniSQL: Synthesizing high-quality text-to-SQL data at scale. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment . ArXiv:2503.02240. Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge Qu, and 1 others. 2023. Can llm already serve as a database interface? abig bench for large-scale database grounded text-to-sqls. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36. Yifu Liu, Yin Zhu, Yingqi Gao, Zhiling Luo, Xiaoxia Li, Xiaorong Shi, Yuntao Hong, Jinyang Gao, Yu Li, Bolin Ding, and Jingren Zhou. 2026. XiYan-SQL: A Novel Multi-Generator Framework For Text-to-SQL. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.04701 .Yuyu Luo, Guoliang Li, Ju Fan, Chengliang Chai, and Nan Tang. 2025. Natural Language to SQL: State of the Art and Open Problems. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 18(12):5466–33547131. Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Pranjal Gupta, and 1 others. 2023. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36. Mohammadreza Pourreza, Hailong Chang, Nima Amin, and 1 others. 2024. CHASE-SQL: Multi-Path Reasoning and Preference Optimized Candi-date Selection in Text-to-SQL. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.01943 .Mohammadreza Pourreza and Davood Rafiei. 2023. DIN-SQL: Decomposed In-Context Learning of Text-to-SQL with Self-Correction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .Nitarshan Rajkumar, Raymond Li, and Dzmitry Bah-danau. 2022. Evaluating the Text-to-SQL Capabil-ities of Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00498 .Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings using Siamese BERT-Networks. In 2019 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th In-ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) .Torsten Scholak, Nathan Schucher, and Dzmitry Bah-danau. 2021. PICARD: Parsing Incrementally for Constrained Auto-Regressive Decoding from Lan-guage Models. In 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .Ruoxi Sun, Sercan Arik, Alex Muzio, Lesly Miculivi-cius, Satya Gundabathula, Pengcheng Yin, Hanjun Dai, Hootan Nakhost, Rajarishi Sinha, Zifeng Wang, and Tomas Pfister. 2023. SQL-PaLM: Improved Large Language Model Adaptation for Text-to-SQL. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00739 .Shayan Talaei, Mohammadreza Pourreza, Yu-Chen Chang, and 1 others. 2024. CHESS: Contextual Harnessing for Efficient SQL Synthesis. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16755 .Bailin Wang, Richard Shin, Xiaodong Liu, and 1 others. 2020. RAT-SQL: Relation-Aware Schema Encod-ing and Linking for Text-to-SQL Parsers. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (ACL) .Bing Wang, Changyu Ren, Jian Yang, Xinnian Liang, Jiaqi Bai, Qian-Wen Zhang, Zhao Yan, and Zhoujun Li. 2025a. MAC-SQL: A Multi-Agent Collabora-tive Framework for Text-to-SQL. In International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING 2025) .Pengfei Wang, Baolin Sun, Xuemei Dong, Yaxun Dai, Hongwei Yuan, Mengdie Chu, Yingqi Gao, Xiang Qi, Peng Zhang, and Ying Yan. 2025b. Agentar-Scale-SQL: Advancing Text-to-SQL through Or-chestrated Test-Time Scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.24403 .Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, and 1 others. 2023. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Yuanzhen Xie, Xinzhou Jin, Tao Xie, MingXiong Lin, Liang Chen, and 1 others. 2024. Decomposition for Enhancing Attention: Improving LLM-based Text-to-SQL through Workflow Paradigm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10671 .Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, and 1 others. 2018. Spi-der: A large-scale human-labeled dataset for complex and cross-domain semantic parsing and text-to-sql task. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Em-pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing .Bohan Zhai, Canwen Xu, Yuxiong He, and Zhewei Yao. 2025. ExCoT: Optimizing Reasoning for Text-to-SQL with Execution Feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19988 .Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, and 1 oth-ers. 2023. Least-to-Most Prompting Enables Com-plex Reasoning in Large Language Models. In In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Yizhang Zhu, Runzhi Jiang, Boyan Li, Nan Tang, and Yuyu Luo. 2025. EllieSQL: Cost-Efficient Text-to-SQL with Complexity-Aware Routing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.22402 .A Detailed Algorithms 

A.1 Schema Selector 

Algorithm 2 details the S CHEMA SELECTOR com-ponent that prunes the full database schema before any downstream LLM call. The selector makes three sequential LLM calls: first to extract task-relevant keywords from the question and evidence, then to identify the necessary tables, and finally to pinpoint the required columns within those tables. All LLM-returned names are remapped to their true schema counterparts via exact match followed by fuzzy match (FM), guarding against surface-level naming discrepancies in the LLM output. F UZZY -MATCH finds the closest LLM-returned name to each true schema name by string similarity, re-turning ∅ if no sufficiently close match exists. If the pruning procedure would produce an empty schema, the original schema is returned instead. 

Algorithm 2 SCHEMA SELECTOR : LLM-Driven Schema Pruning                                                                

> Require: Question Q, full schema S, evidence E
> Ensure: Pruned schema Spruned , keyword list K
> 1: { Step 1: Keyword Extraction }2: K←LLM IR (Q, E ){Extract keywords, entities, value mappings} 3: { Step 2: Table Selection }4: Tsel ←LLM TS (Q, E, K, S){Select relevant table names} 5: { Step 3: Column Selection }6: Csel ←LLM CS (Q, E, K, Tsel ){Select relevant columns per table} 7: { Step 4: Name Remapping & Schema Assembly }8: Spruned ← {}
> 9: for all table t∈ S do
> 10: ˆt←FM (t. name ,Tsel )
> 11: if ˆtfound then
> 12: Ct← { c∈t. cols :FM (c. name ,Csel [ˆ t]) }
> 13: if Ct̸=∅then
> 14: Spruned .add (t. name , C t)
> 15: end if
> 16: end if
> 17: end for
> 18: if Spruned =∅then
> 19: return S, K {Fallback: return original schema} 20: end if
> 21: return Spruned , K

A.2 Topological Execution Order 

Algorithm 3 computes the node execution order from the decomposition DAG using Kahn’s algo-rithm (Kahn, 1962). In the DAG G = ( V, E ), a directed edge (u, v ) indicates that node v consumes the result of node u, so u must execute before v.Leaf nodes (in-degree zero) have no upstream de-pendencies and are scheduled first; a cycle detec-tion check guards against malformed LLM outputs. 

Algorithm 3 TOPOLOGICAL SORT : Dependency-Aware Execution Ordering                                                                        

> Require: DAG G= ( V, E ); edge (u, v )means vdepends on u
> Ensure: Execution queue Queue with all dependencies be-fore dependents 1: depCount [v]← |{ u: ( u, v )∈E}| for all v∈V
> 2: Ready ← { v∈V:depCount [v] = 0 }{Leaf nodes} 3: Queue ←[ ]
> 4: while Ready is not empty do
> 5: n←Ready .pop ()
> 6: Queue .append (n)
> 7: for all dependent dsuch that (n, d )∈Edo
> 8: depCount [d]←depCount [d]−1
> 9: if depCount [d] = 0 then
> 10: Ready .add (d){All of d’s dependencies re-solved} 11: end if
> 12: end for
> 13: end while
> 14: if |Queue |<|V|then
> 15: raise CYCLE DETECTED ERROR
> 16: end if
> 17: return Queue

A.3 Dependency Placeholder Resolution 

When a downstream node depends on the result of an upstream node u via the @[ u] placeholder, DecoSearch must inject that result into the down-stream node’s sub-question and SQL prompt before generation begins. The injection strategy is chosen based on the cardinality of node u’s result set. 

Small result sets ( |R u| ≤ θ). If the result con-tains at most θ = 100 rows, the values are seri-alized directly as a SQL value list. For example, 

@[1] in the sub-question text is replaced with the literal tuple (’v1’, ’v2’, . . . ) , which can ap-pear directly inside an IN (. . . ) clause in the generated SQL. 

Large result sets ( |R u| > θ ). When the result exceeds θ rows, inlining the values would produce an unwieldy prompt and an oversized SQL literal. Instead, DecoSearch materializes the result into a 

SQLite temporary table using: 

CREATE TEMPORARY TABLE temp_ds_node_ u AS 

⟨SQL u⟩

The temporary table temp_ds_node_ u is then ref-erenced by name wherever @[ u] appears in down-stream SQL, and a schema description comment is prepended to the downstream node’s prompt so the LLM knows the table exists and can query it like any ordinary table. The temporary table persists for the lifetime of the database connection and is therefore available to all subsequent nodes in the same execution run. Fallback. If temporary-table creation is disabled or the result is empty, values are truncated to a ad-justable limit ( 200 rows by default) with a comment appended to the SQL noting the truncation. 

A.4 Topology Refiner 

Algorithm 4 details T OPOLOGY REFINER , invoked from the main pipeline (Algorithm 1) when execu-tion fails at a DAG node and the refinement budget 

B has not been exhausted. The refiner serializes the current graph to JSON, constructs a prompt that includes the failing node’s sub-question and the execution error, and asks the LLM to produce a structurally revised DAG. The caller rejects the revision if it is isomorphic to the original (no struc-tural change) or contains a cycle, and falls back to the original graph in either case. 

Algorithm 4 TOPOLOGY REFINER : LLM-Driven DAG Revision 

Require: DAG G, failing node n∗, failure reason ρ, question 

Q, evidence E

Ensure: Revised DAG G′ (or G if revision is invalid) 1: J ← Serialize (G) {Graph → JSON} 2: prompt ← BuildPrompt (Q, E, J, n ∗, ρ )

3: response ← LLM (prompt )

4: J′ ← ExtractJSON (response )

5: if J′ is valid JSON then 

6: G′ ← Deserialize (J′)

7: if G′ is isomorphic to G then 

8: return G {No structural change; skip} 9: end if 

10: if G′ contains a cycle then 

11: return G {Reject invalid DAG} 12: end if 

13: return G′

14: else 

15: return G {Parse failure; retain original} 16: end if 

B Detailed Experiment Setup 

All experiments on both BIRD and Spider use the same configuration unless otherwise stated. DeepSeek-V3 (deepseek-chat ) serves as the backbone for every LLM role in the pipeline, and a global random seed of 42 is fixed across all API calls to ensure reproducibility. The judger and the direct SQL generator both run at temperature 

T = 0 to produce deterministic outputs, while the decomposer runs at T = 0 .1 to allow for slightly varied but still constrained decomposition strate-gies. The RAG-based decomposer retrieves k = 3 

similar examples from the training knowledge base using all-MiniLM-L6-v2 embeddings to construct few-shot decomposition prompts. If execution fails at any DAG node, the topology refiner is invoked for up to B = 3 revision attempts before falling back to the best available result. The schema se-lector runs a three-stage LLM pipeline (keyword extraction, table selection, column selection) to prune the full database schema before any down-stream call; pruning is adaptive with no hard cap on the number of retained tables, and fuzzy matching is applied to guard against naming discrepancies in the LLM output. 

C Prompts 

We report the core prompt templates used by each pipeline component. Slots filled dynamically at runtime are shown in [SLOT] .

C.1 Judger Prompt 

Judger Prompt 

System: You are an expert SQL architect and query planner. Your job is to analyze a natural language question and a database schema to decide if the question should be decomposed into multiple sub-questions or if it can be solved reliably with a single direct SQL query. 

STRATEGY: PREFER DIRECT SQL 

Empirical analysis shows that our Direct SQL path is highly accurate. Decomposition should be used ONLY as a "Heavy Lifting" tool for logic that cannot be reliably expressed in a single pass. 

1. When to choose Direct SQL (needs_decomposition: false): 

• Standard Relational Lookups: Even with 2–4 joins, a single query is usually best. 

• Simple Filters & Mappings: Using values from the Hint to filter columns. 

• Standard Aggregations: SUM, AVG, COUNT, MAX/MIN per group. 

• Basic Subqueries: WHERE id IN (SELECT ...) or simple CTEs. 

2. When to choose Decomposition (needs_decomposition: true): 

• Conflicting Aggregation Grains: Asking for a detail and a scalar at once (e.g., “List all students AND the average score”). 

• Extreme Join Complexity: Joining ≥5 tables where the path is highly ambiguous. 

• Complex Multi-Phase Reasoning: When Step 2 depends on a mathematical result from Step 1 that must be calculated first (e.g., “Find the top earner, then find all their transactions”). 

• Evidence-Driven Fork: If the Hint specifies a formula or complex mapping that makes a single query extremely nested and error-prone. 

Input: 

Database Schema: {schema} Natural Language Question: {question} Task: Your task is to analyze the question and schema. Decide if the question NEEDS to be decomposed. 

Output: Respond with a JSON object. Only output the JSON object. Do not include any other text or markdown formatting. {"needs_decomposition": true/false, "reasoning": "A brief explanation of your decision based on the criteria (simplicity, JOINs, logical steps)."} Now, take a deep breath, and think step by step to make your decision. 

C.2 Decomposer Prompt 

Decomposition Planner Prompt 

System: You are a specialized SQL Architect and Query Planner. Your task is to decompose a complex natural language question into alogically sound dependency graph (DAG) of simpler sub-questions. 

MISSION: Break the question into atomic, executable steps where each step produces aresult required by the next. 

STRICT DECOMPOSITION RULES: 

• 1. MANDATORY IDENTIFIER PASSING: If Step A depends on Step B, Step B MUST return aspecific identifier (like an ID, Code, or Name) that Step A can use for filtering. Example: “Find the IDs of...” followed by “Find the details for IDs in @[ID]”. 

• 2. PLACEHOLDER SYNTAX: Use @[node_id] to reference the result of a previous step. 

• 3. EVIDENCE IS THE MAP: BIRD Evidence often contains formulas or value mappings. If the evidence says “‘Active’ means status=1”, create a sub-question that handles that specific filter or calculation. 

• 4. NO FRAGMENTATION: Do not create anew node for every single clause. Only decompose if the result of one query is logically required to build the next (e.g., Finding a Max/Min, or finding a set of IDs to filter a different table). 

• 5. ROOT NODE PRECISION: The root node (ID 0) must be the final transformation. It should return the exact column(s) requested in the original question using the results from its children. Use the provided successful examples below to understand the correct decomposition format and style. {examples_prompt_str} 

Input: 

Database Schema: {schema} Evidence (Hint): {evidence} (Optional) Question: {question} 

Output Format (JSON Only): 

• Output must be a single JSON object with nodes and edges. 

• Nodes: id (integer) and question (string). 

• Edges: [parent_id, child_id], where parent depends on child. 

• The graph must be a DAG, flowing from leaves to root. 

Output only the valid JSON representation of the graph. 

C.3 SQL Generator Prompt 

SQL Generator Prompt - BIRD 

System: You are an expert SQL generator. Below, you are presented with a database schema and a question. Your task is to read the schema, understand the question, and generate a valid {self.db_type} query to answer the question. 

Input: 

Database Schema: {schema_str} Question: {sub_question} Hint (Evidence): {evidence} 

MANDATORY BIRD EXECUTION RULES: 

• 1. The Hint is GROUND TRUTH: The Hint (Evidence) is a strict requirement. If the hint provides a mapping (e.g., “’A”’ for “’Active”’) or a specific filter value, you MUST use it exactly as specified. Do not deviate from the hint. 

• 2. Case-Insensitivity: SQLite is case-sensitive for string comparisons. Use LOWER() on columns and filter values (e.g., LOWER(city) = LOWER(’London’)) or LIKE for all string filters unless the hint specifies otherwise. 

• 3. Joins: Use explicit JOIN ... ON syntax. 

• 4. Name vs ID: Always prefer using the name column over the id column unless the hint specifies otherwise. 

• 5. Null Handling: Be mindful of NULL values in your logic, especially in aggregations and comparisons. 

• 6. Final Check: Ensure your query returns all requested information and nothing extra. 

Output: Please respond with a JSON object structured as follows: {"SQL": "Your SQL query in a single string."} Take a deep breath and think step by step to find the correct SQL query. 

SQL Generator Prompt - Spider 

System: You are a data science expert. Below, you are presented with a database schema and a question. Your task is to read the schema, understand the question, and generate a valid {self.db_type} query to answer the question. Before generating the final SQL query think step by step on how to write the query. 

Input: 

Database Schema: {schema_str} Question: {sub_question} Hint: {evidence} This schema offers an in-depth description of the database’s architecture, detailing tables, columns, primary keys, foreign keys, and any pertinent information regarding relationships or constraints. Special attention should be given to the examples listed beside each column, as they directly hint at which columns are relevant to our query. 

Database instructions: 

• Make sure you only output the information that is asked in the question. If the question asks for a specific column, make sure to only include that column in the SELECT clause, nothing more. 

• Predicted query should return all of the information asked in the question without any missing or extra information. Priority should be given to columns that have been explicitly matched with examples relevant to the question’s context. 

Output: Please respond with a JSON object structured as follows: {"chain_of_thought_reasoning": "Your thought process...", "SQL": "Your SQL query in a single string." }Take a deep breath and think step by step to find the correct {self.db_type} SQL query. 

C.4 SQL Refiner Prompt 

SQL Refiner Prompt 

System: You are an expert SQL debugger. Fix a failing SQL query using the full history of prior attempts and their execution errors. 

Input: 

Question: [QUESTION] Database Schema: [SCHEMA] Evidence: [EVIDENCE] Attempt history ([N] failed attempts): [HISTORY] 

Task: Review all prior failures and produce a corrected SQL query that addresses every identified issue. Do not include a trailing semicolon. 

Output: Corrected SQL query. 

C.5 Topology Refiner Prompt 

Topology Refiner Prompt 

System: You are an expert workflow planner. Your task is to revise a task decomposition graph that has failed during execution. 

Input: 

Original User Question: {question} Current Decomposition Graph (JSON): {graph_json_str} Execution Failure: 

• The plan failed at Node {failed_node_id} .

• Sub-question for this node: "{sub-question}" 

• Reason for failure: "{failure_reason}" 

Your Task: Analyze the failure and the overall graph, then propose a corrected version of the graph in JSON format. 

Revision Rules: 

• 1. Localize Changes: Make the minimum necessary changes to fix the issue. Focus on the area around the failed node. 

• 2. Allowed Operations: 

– Rephrase a node: Modify the ’question’ of a node to be clearer or more specific. 

– Decompose a node: Replace a single failed node with two or more simpler nodes. Ensure you correctly wire the new dependencies. 

– Add a node: Add a new intermediate step if a prerequisite was missing. 

– Rewire edges: Change the dependencies (edges) if the data flow was incorrect. 

• 3. Preserve Completed Nodes: Do NOT modify nodes that have already executed successfully (i.e., nodes that are dependencies of the failed node). 

• 4. Maintain Graph Integrity: The output must be a valid Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG). Do not introduce cycles. 

• 5. Output Format: Your output MUST be only the complete, revised graph in the same JSON format as the input. Do not include any other text, explanations, or markdown formatting. 

Output: Revised Graph (JSON only): {"nodes": [...], "edges": [...] }

D Case Studies 

We present two worked examples from the BIRD development set illustrating how DecoSearch de-composes complex questions into a dependency DAG and solves each sub-question in topological order. Both examples were solved correctly by De-coSearch while generating a direct SQL attempt failed to produce the right answer. 

D.1 Example 1: Sequential Dependency Chain 

Question & Context — formula_1 database 

NLQ: How many accidents did the driver who had the highest number of accidents in the Canadian Grand Prix have? 

Evidence: accidents ≡ rows where statusId = 3; Canadian Grand Prix ≡ races.name = ‘Canadian Grand Prix’ 

Judger decision: Decompose. The question requires a two-phase aggregation: first materialise the set of Canadian GP race IDs, then identify the most-accident driver in those races, and finally count their accidents. Expressing this as a single MAX(COUNT(. . . )) subquery is error-prone in one-shot generation. 

DAG (3 nodes; execution order 1 → 2 → 0): Node 1 

raceId lookup 

Node 2 

top driver 

@[1] 

Node 0 

count accidents 

@[1] , @[2] 

leaf intermediate root 

Node Deps. Sub-question 

1 — Find the raceId (s) for the race named ‘Canadian Grand Prix’ .2 @[1] Find the driverId with the most accidents ( statusId=3 ) among races @[1] .0 @[1] , @[2] Count accidents for driver @[2] 

across races @[1] .

Node 1 (leaf) — no dependencies 

SELECT raceId FROM races WHERE name = ’Canadian Grand Prix’ 

Node 2 — uses @[1] 

SELECT driverId FROM results WHERE statusId = 3 AND raceId IN @[1] GROUP BY driverId ORDER BY COUNT(*) DESC LIMIT 1

Node 0 (root) — uses @[1] , @[2] 

SELECT COUNT(*) FROM results WHERE driverId = @[2] AND statusId = 3 AND raceId IN @[1] 

Answer: 2 ✓ Matches gold. 

Why decomposition helps: Direct queries for this pattern demand a nested MAX(COUNT(...)) struc-ture, a complexity that often causes LLMs to hallu-cinate or mistake it for a flat aggregation. By mate-rializing the driver ID as an intermediate result, the task is simplified into basic GROUP BY operations or filters, which the model processes reliably. 

D.2 Example 2: Parallel Branches with Aggregation 

Question & Context — thrombosis_prediction 

database 

NLQ: What is the ratio of male to female patients among all those with abnormal uric acid counts? 

Evidence: male ≡ SEX=‘M’; female ≡ SEX=‘F’; abnormal UA ≡ UA ≤8.0 for males, UA ≤6.5 for females; ratio = DIVIDE(count_M, count_F) 

Judger decision: Decompose. The ratio depends on two separate conditional counts with sex-specific thresholds. Decomposition computes each count independently, then combines them in the root node, avoiding the compound CASE-within-CASE logic that often produces off-by-one errors in direct generation. 

DAG (4 nodes; execution order 3 → 1, 2 → 0;diamond topology): 

Node 3 

abnormal UA patient IDs 

Node 1 

count males 

@[3] 

Node 2 

count females 

@[3] 

Node 0 

M:F ratio 

@[1] , @[2] 

leaf intermediate root 

Node Deps. Sub-question 

3 — Find all patient IDs where UA is abnormal: ( SEX=’M’ & UA ≤8.0 )

OR (SEX=’F’ & UA ≤6.5 ). 1 @[3] Count distinct male patients (SEX=’M’ ) from @[3] .2 @[3] Count distinct female patients (SEX=’F’ ) from @[3] .0 @[1] , @[2] Compute CAST(@[1] AS REAL) / @[2] .

Node 3 (leaf) — no dependencies 

SELECT DISTINCT l.ID FROM Laboratory l JOIN Patient p ON l.ID = p.ID WHERE (p.SEX = ’M’ AND l.UA <= 8.0) OR (p.SEX = ’F’ AND l.UA <= 6.5)                 

> Node 1 —uses @[3]
> SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT p.ID) FROM Patient p WHERE p.ID IN @[3] AND p.SEX = ’M’
> Node 2 —uses @[3]
> SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT p.ID) FROM Patient p WHERE p.ID IN @[3] AND p.SEX = ’F’
> Node 0 (root) —uses @[1] ,@[2]
> SELECT CAST(@[1] AS REAL) /NULLIF(@[2], 0) AS ratio

Answer: 0.2057 ✓ Matches gold. 

Why decomposition helps: The sex-specific ab-normality thresholds make it natural to separate the population filtering (Node 3) from the sex-conditional counts (Nodes 1 and 2). A direct query must interleave both concerns in a single CASE ex-pression, a pattern where LLMs frequently apply the wrong threshold to the wrong gender. The di-amond topology here shows that DecoSearch is not limited to linear chains: two sibling nodes can share a common dependency and produce indepen-dent partial results that are combined at the root. 

E LLM Usage 

In this paper, we leverage LLMs, including Chat-GPT and Gemini, to refine sentence-level writing.