Title: MagicSelector: Joint Optimization for Agent Tool Selection via Counterfactual Decomposition and Progressive Reranking

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.17751v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Jul 2026 01:41:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
# MagicSelector: Joint Optimization for Agent Tool Selection via Counterfactual Decomposition and Progressive Reranking 

HONOR Agentic Search Team 

ABSTRACT 

We present MagicSelector, a joint optimization framework integrating Counterfactual task decompo-sition, Progressive reranking, and Dynamic Top-K, designed to address the fundamental challenges of tool retrieval in agents. MagicSelector is a specialized framework capable of translating ambigu-ous user instructions into executable atomic subtasks and guiding high-precision tool retrieval, effec-tively mitigating redundant noise and severe context distraction in out-of-domain (OOD) scenarios. We empower MagicSelector with these capabilities through three key contributions: (1) a preference-guided counterfactual task decomposition mechanism that utilizes a counterfactual reward to quan-tify the marginal causal gain of decomposition on retrieval ranking, effectively imposing fine-grained structural supervision on logical coherence; (2) a progressive tool reranking method driven by self-distillation hard negative mining, which optimizes both point-wise and list-wise relevance to enhance fine-grained discrimination among highly similar tools; and (3) a dual semantic boundary-aware dy-namic Top-K strategy that adaptively monitors reranking score cliffs and inter-tool semantic shifts to dynamically truncate the candidate list, maximizing relevant tool recall while filtering long-tail noise. Evaluated on MTDTool, the first task decomposition benchmark we constructed tailored for mobile multi-turn interactions with process-level annotations, MagicSelector yields promising per-formance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MagicSelector significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of tool retrieval accuracy, OOD generalization capability, and overall token efficiency, thereby demonstrating the effectiveness of our proposed framework. 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) (Zhao et al., 2026c; Naveed et al., 2025) have catalyzed a fundamental shift from passive text generation to the development of autonomous agents ca-pable of interacting with external environments through tool invocation (Huang et al., 2024c). A promi-nent and highly practical instantiation of this paradigm is the mobile agent, which operates in complex, real-world reasoning environments. In such settings, user interactions are highly diverse, encompassing multi-turn contexts, ambiguous references, and complex multi-task instructions within a single utterance. To fulfill these complex instructions, mobile agents must interact with a rapidly growing ecosystem of external tools. However, as feeding all tool descriptions into a limited context window is computationally intractable, tool retrieval (Shi et al., 2025) has emerged as the critical cognitive bottleneck. The evolution of tool retrieval has primarily bifurcated into static and dynamic injection paradigms. While dynamic injection enables agents to actively fetch tools to explore open environments (Qian et al., 2023; Cai et al., 2024; Du et al., 2024a), this active acquisition process inevitably increases system latency. Furthermore, as practical mobile applications increasingly adopt Model Context Protocol (MCP) tools, there is a strict requirement for recalling highly precise tools to ensure exact schema matching and execution safety. arXiv:2607.17751v1 [cs.IR] 20 Jul 2026 HONOR 

Therefore, to balance low latency with high precision, practical tool retrieval for mobile agents must predominantly rely on static knowledge injection (Schick et al., 2023; Patil et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2024b). Crucially, under this static retrieval paradigm, existing efforts mostly focus on straightforward, single-intent queries. Directly matching the convoluted user instructions of mobile agents against a static library of atomic tools inevitably leads to severe semantic mismatch and retrieval failure. Therefore, fine-grained task decomposition is highly necessary to act as a deep planning mechanism—translating multi-turn and multi-task dialogues into executable atomic subtasks before retrieval. However, unlike general text re-trieval, constructing an effective tool retrieval pipeline driven by task decomposition inherently involves several critical challenges. 

First , how can we prevent the decomposition model from maximizing retrieval matching through short-cut strategies, such as repetitive decomposition, during optimization? Early prompt-based and super-vised fine-tuning (SFT) methods (Yao et al., 2022; Braunschweiler et al., 2025; Jagerman et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024a) suffer from cumulative errors. Meanwhile, recent reinforcement learning (RL) meth-ods (Fang & Glass, 2026; Guo et al., 2025) lack causal attribution in their reward signals. By relying on static, outcome-oriented metrics, models easily fall into local optima. Specifically, they tend to exploit spurious correlations between the shallow features of decomposition results and retrieval metrics, rather than performing precise decomposition. This severely impairs generalization in out-of-domain (OOD) scenarios involving unseen tools. Second , how can we accurately distinguish functionally similar tools? Given the significant semantic gap between heterogeneous user queries and massive tool documentation, traditional reranking paradigms (Gangi Reddy et al., 2024; Yoon et al., 2024; Zhi et al., 2026) lack deep token-level interactions. Moreover, relying on random negative samples provides weak learning signals, limiting the model’s discriminative capability. Third , how should we dynamically filter noise while pre-serving crucial tools to maintain context efficiency? Existing retrieval mechanisms predominantly rely on static Top-K truncation heuristics. A conservative K value causes false negatives for crucial tools, whereas an aggressive K value inevitably introduces redundant long-tail noise, exacerbating inference overhead and inducing context distraction phenomena like the lost-in-the-middle effect. In this work, we propose MagicSelector, a joint optimization framework designed to address these fun-damental challenges by integrating counterfactual task decomposition (Zhao et al., 2026a), progressive reranking, and dynamic Top-K (see Figure 1). Specifically, MagicSelector features three primary as-pects corresponding to the aforementioned challenges. To address the first challenge, we introduce a preference-guided counterfactual task decomposition mechanism (Kaddour et al., 2025). By utilizing a counterfactual reward to quantify the marginal causal gain of decomposition on retrieval ranking, it shifts the optimization objective from outcome matching to process gain, effectively cutting off spurious cor-relations and providing an effective gradient direction for the policy model. This approach is applicable to single-turn dialogues, multi-turn dialogues, as well as single-utterance multi-task scenarios. To tackle the second challenge, we propose a progressive tool reranking method driven by self-distillation hard negative mining. This method optimizes both point-wise and list-wise relevance, and iteratively mines high-scoring incorrect tools as hard negatives, forcing the model to confront its own failure cases to enhance fine-grained discrimination among highly similar tools. To overcome the third challenge, we design a dual semantic boundary-aware dynamic Top-K strategy. By adaptively monitoring reranking score cliffs and inter-tool semantic shifts, this method dynamically truncates the candidate list, maximiz-ing relevant tool recall while filtering long-tail noise. Furthermore, since existing benchmarks (Wang et al., 2025a; Qin et al., 2024b) lack process-level annotations, we construct MTDTool, the first multi-turn dialogue task decomposition benchmark tailored for mobile scenarios, providing a standardized foundation for evaluating decomposition quality. The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: 2HONOR Dialogue     

> Reference
> Reward
> Counterfactual
> Recall Reward
> Reference Model
> Atomic
> Tasks
> Candidate
> Tools
> Self -Distillation Driven
> Hard Negative Mining
> Model
> Predictions
> Basic Relevance
> Scores
> Optimized Tool
> List Ranking
> Progressive Reranking
> Reranked
> Tool List
> Dual Semantic Boundary
> Awareness
> Integration
> Truncation
> Point
> Final Tool List
> (Adaptive Top -K)
> gap
> Retrieve
> Policy Model
> Point -wise
> Training
> List -wise
> Training
> Hard Negative
> Identification
> KL Divergence
> Constraint
> Mixed Reward
> Candidate
> Decompositions
> Reward Output
> Gradient
> Update
> Reranking
> Score Gaps
> Inter -tool
> Semantic Gaps
> Stage 1:Task Decomposition Stage 2:Tool Recall Stage 3:Dynamic Truncation

Figure 1: The overall framework of MagicSelector. It presents a joint optimization pipeline integrat-ing counterfactual task decomposition, progressive reranking, and dynamic Top-K for complex tool-use scenarios. The framework consists of three key phases: (1) Task Decomposition via Counterfactual RL , which introduces a counterfactual reward mechanism based on relative ranking gains to provide precise causal attribution, guiding the agent to learn semantically accurate and structurally robust de-composition strategies; (2) Progressive Tool Reranking with Hard Negative Mining , which employs a Cross-Encoder for point-wise and list-wise optimization, coupled with self-distillation to automatically mine hard negative samples, thereby enhancing fine-grained discrimination among highly similar tools; 

(3) Dual Semantic Boundary-Aware Dynamic Top-K , which adaptively truncates the candidate list by monitoring both reranking score cliffs and inter-tool semantic shifts, effectively maximizing relevant tool recall while filtering long-tail noise to reduce token consumption and mitigate the lost-in-the-middle effect. • Insight. We provide a comprehensive diagnosis of the current tool retrieval pipeline for au-tonomous agents, formulating three critical bottlenecks: the non-causal reward signals in RL-based decomposition, the vulnerability of traditional reranking to functionally similar tools, and the inherent noise-inducing limitations of rigid Top-K truncation. • Method. We propose MagicSelector, a joint optimization framework that seamlessly integrates task decomposition, fine-grained reranking, and adaptive context truncation. It utilizes counterfactual rewards to inject causal retrieval gains, introduces progressive reranking driven by self-distillation hard negative mining, and develops a dynamic Top-K strategy based on dual semantic boundary awareness. • Dataset. To bridge the gap in evaluating complex real-world interactions, we construct and release MTDTool. This is the first multi-turn dialogue task decomposition benchmark tailored for mobile scenarios, featuring fine-grained process-level annotations to support holistic pipeline evaluation. • Evaluation. We conduct extensive evaluations across diverse and realistic tool-use scenarios. Em-pirical results demonstrate that MagicSelector significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art approaches in overall retrieval accuracy, exhibiting exceptional robustness and remarkably high token efficiency, particularly in out-of-domain (OOD) tool generalization. 3HONOR 

2 RELATED WORK 

2.1 Planning and Tool Retrieval in Agents 

Research on agent planning and tool retrieval has evolved along two primary paradigms (Huang et al., 2024c; Yehudai et al., 2025): (1) Prompt-based and In-Context Learning approaches, grounded in the “Reasoning-Acting-Reflecting” cycle established by ReAct (Yao et al., 2022) and Tool-ReAct (Braun-schweiler et al., 2025). Subsequent works (e.g., Toolformer (Schick et al., 2023), Gorilla (Patil et al., 2024), and the ToolLLM (Qin et al., 2024b) series) have achieved effective tool selection within fixed inventories by explicitly generating chains of thought, sub-goals, or API invocation sequences; and (2) Joint optimization via Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) (Zhao et al., 2026b) and Reinforcement Learning (Liu et al., 2026), designed to address challenges in large-scale open tool libraries. These methods typically decompose complex instructions into structured sub-queries (e.g., DAG-based atomic planning in Plan-RAG (Verma et al., 2024) or iterative query planning in TOOLQP (Fang & Glass, 2026)) and refine policies using synthetic trajectories and RLVR. Recent studies (e.g., ToolRL (Qian et al., 2026), RLTR (Li et al., 2025), GiGPO (Feng et al., 2026)) further incorporate GRPO (Guo et al., 2025), fine-grained tool-use rewards, or hierarchical advantage estimation to enhance end-to-end perfor-mance in long-horizon planning and multi-step invocation. However, existing paradigms largely rely on sparse rewards based on final task completion or coarse-grained trajectory-level feedback. They often treat task decomposition as a static heuristic preceding retrieval, lacking fine-grained causal modeling of how decomposition semantics directly influence tool retrieval ranking quality. To address this limitation, we model multi-turn contextual task decomposition as an optimizable planning strategy and propose a Counterfactual Retrieval Reward mechanism. By quantifying the relative gain in retrieval quality be-fore and after decomposition, we explicitly inject retrieval ranking signals into policy training, thereby achieving joint collaborative optimization of task planning and tool retrieval. 

2.2 Benchmarks for Tool Retrieval 

Existing benchmarks for agent task decomposition and tool retrieval fall into two primary categories: tool-interaction benchmarks (e.g., API-Bank (Li et al., 2023a), ToolBench (Qin et al., 2024b), MINT-Bench (Wang et al., 2024b), τ-Bench (Yao et al., 2024), UltraTool (Huang et al., 2024a), and ToolRet (Shi et al., 2025)), which focus on tool selection, parameter alignment, complex long-tail invocation, and retrieval robustness; and task-oriented benchmarks (e.g., AgentBench (Liu et al., 2024b), GAIA (Mialon et al., 2024), WebArena (Zhou et al., 2024), and TaskBench (Shen et al., 2024)), which emphasize end-to-end planning, task decomposition, and completion rates in open environments. Although recent efforts like HammerBench (Wang et al., 2025a) have extended evaluation to function calls in real-world mobile scenarios, mainstream benchmarks remain constrained by Outcome Bias, relying predominantly on final success rates or trajectory-level metrics. They critically lack fine-grained process annotations for multi-turn interactions, such as cross-turn context inheritance, coreference resolution, dynamic intent evolution, task atomization, and semantic tool mapping. To address this, we introduce MTDTool, a fine-grained benchmark for multi-turn mobile interactions. By providing multi-level annotations covering dialogue intent evolution chains and ranked tool candidates, it establishes a new paradigm for fine-grained process evaluation in complex mobile contexts, offering a standardized basis for quantifying the impact of task decomposition quality on tool retrieval efficacy. 4HONOR 

2.3 LLM-based Reranking 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have significantly advanced text and tool reranking, outperforming tra-ditional encoder-based models. Existing reranking methodologies predominantly fall into three paradigms: pointwise, pairwise, and listwise. Pointwise methods independently score each query-document pair (Nogueira & Cho, 2019; Nogueira et al., 2020; Sachan et al., 2022). While highly efficient for establish-ing a foundational relevance scorer, they inherently ignore the fine-grained interactions among candidate items. Pairwise approaches address this by ranking items through direct pair comparisons (Nogueira et al., 2019; Pradeep et al., 2021; Qin et al., 2023), providing stronger ranking signals but incurring prohibitive computational costs. Listwise rerankers jointly evaluate multiple candidates to infer their optimal relative order (Sun et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023; Pradeep et al., 2023), demonstrating superior performance in capturing holistic list context. However, relying on a single paradigm often struggles to balance efficiency and fine-grained discrimination, especially when distinguishing highly similar tools in out-of-domain scenarios. To bridge this gap, our MagicSelector framework introduces a progressive reranking method that synergizes the strengths of these paradigms. By initially employing point-wise training to build a robust base relevance scorer, and subsequently utilizing list-wise training to optimize the relative order of candidates, MagicSelector effectively captures both absolute and relative relevance. Furthermore, this progressive process is driven by self-distillation hard negative mining, which signifi-cantly enhances fine-grained discrimination among highly similar tools. 

2.4 Dynamic Top-K Truncation in Tool Retrieval 

Research on Top-K truncation strategies for tool retrieval primarily explores two paradigms. First, Fixed Top-K Truncation (Lewis et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2024a) relies on a predefined constant limit. This rigid approach causes recall misses when relevant tools exceed this limit, or introduces massive irrelevant noise when they are fewer, wasting context tokens and exacerbating LLM hallucination risks. Second, Threshold-based Dynamic Top-K sets absolute thresholds or relative proportions based on reranking scores (Xia et al., 2025). However, score distributions vary drastically across queries, making fixed thresholds prone to over-fitting or under-fitting. This is critical in complex multi-task scenarios where a single user instruction contains multiple independent sub-tasks. Here, true relevant tools for distinct sub-tasks might lack high overall matching scores with the global query. Applying a fixed threshold erroneously filters out these specific target tools, leading to multi-task execution failures.Furthermore, existing dynamic Top-K methods rely on a single strategy (Taguchi et al., 2025) focusing solely on the absolute relevance between tools and queries. They neglect the relative redundancy and semantic coherence within the retrieved tool list, failing to accurately capture the true semantic cliff between highly relevant tools and irrelevant long-tail noise. To address effective truncation following LLM reranking, we propose a Dual Semantic Boundary-Aware dynamic Top-K strategy that breaks the limitations of fixed truncation quantities and single score thresholds. By jointly perceiving the reranking score cliff, which reflects the decay boundary of absolute relevance, and the semantic cliff between adjacent tools, which reflects the disruption boundary of semantic coherence within the candidate list, we achieve adaptive dynamic Top-K truncation. 

3 QUERY DECOMPOSITION AND REWRITING 

Query decomposition and rewriting are essential techniques for handling complex user inputs (see Fig-ure 2). By breaking down a complicated question into simpler, manageable sub-queries, models can significantly reduce ambiguity. Recent studies show that rewriting user queries using LLMs improves the downstream retrieval accuracy by aligning the query distribution with the document corpus. 5HONOR 1. Initialization 

(First Turn)      

> Tool & Scene Sampling
> Sample k tools
> State Initialization
> 𝑠 0~𝑃 𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡
> + constraints
> Dual LLM Generation
> LLM -Q: Generate 𝑞 0
> LLM -O: Generate 𝑂 0
> State Evolution at
> Turn t
> 𝒔 𝒕 −𝟏 ,𝒋 →𝒔 𝒕 ,𝒋
> via 𝑃 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒

2. State Evolution & Context Decision 

（Per Turn  t ≥ 1）      

> 1Context
> Decision
> 𝑐 𝑡 ~𝑃 𝑐𝑡𝑥 (⋅|𝑡 )
> Keep Context
> + Add New Tasks
> Inherit Context
> Clear Context
> + Replace Tools
> Switch Topic
> Tool Lifecycle
> Update
> Remove
> Null -state Tools
> Add New Tools
> LLM -Q
> Generate 𝑞 𝑡
> (History + State)
> Task Decomposition
> 𝑞 𝑡 →𝐴 𝑡
> Atomic Subtasks
> LLM -O
> Generate 𝑜 𝑡
> (State -aligned)

3. Turn Generation 

After Decision 

4. Per -Turn Annotation 

& Storage    

> Tool Mapping
> 𝐴 𝑡 →𝑇 𝑡
> 𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑑
> Scene Label &
> Attributions
> Structured Record Assembly
> Append to Storage
> Next Turn (t=t+1)

Figure 2: Overview of the MTDTool construction pipeline. The data generation follows a four-stage process. (1) Initialization : Tools and scenarios are sampled to establish initial constraints, and two LLM generators produce the initial user query q0 and assistant output o0. (2) State Evolution & Context Decision : At each turn t ≥ 1, the system decides whether to inherit the previous context or switch to a new topic, and updates the pending intent pt, j and execution state st, j for each active tool. (3) Turn Generation : Conditioned on the dialogue history Ht , current states, and active tools, the framework generates the user query qt , derives the atomic task sequence At , and produces the state-aligned assistant output ot . (4) Per-Turn Annotation & Storage : The framework maps the atomic task sequence At

to the used tool set T used 

t , assigns scenario labels and attribution information, and stores the structured record. This pipeline preserves the coherence of multi-turn intent evolution while providing fine-grained annotations for task decomposition and tool retrieval. 

3.1 Dataset Construction via a State-Machine-Driven Framework 

To support the evaluation of multi-turn interaction capabilities for smartphone assistants in complex tool-calling scenarios, this paper proposes an automated dialogue generation framework driven by a state machine. The framework conceptualizes multi-turn dialogue as a stochastic process in which tool execution states evolve over time. By explicitly modeling user intent shifts, context inheritance, and as-sistant feedback loops, it generates high-fidelity parallel corpora with fine-grained structural annotations. Unlike existing datasets that merely record final task outcomes, our work further provides atomic task sequences and candidate tool mappings, enabling independent diagnosis of planning reasoning and tool retrieval processes. 

3.1.1 State Space Definition and Dynamic Evolution Mechanism 

We define a state space S of 11 canonical interaction behaviors, encompassing task execution ( s1, s2, s3), clarification ( s4, s5), and intent management ( s6, s7, s8, s10 , s11 ). Each tool ti ∈ T is constrained to a semantically compatible subset Sti ⊆ S . The initial state is sampled from a prior distribution Pinit :

s(0)

i ∼ Pinit (s | ti), s(0)

i ∈ Sti . (1) Lightweight structural constraints are applied to ensure multi-turn continuation. For subsequent turns r ≥ 1, state evolution follows a two-stage decoupled stochastic process: generating a user intent d(r)

i ∼ Ptodo (d | s(r−1)

i ), followed by the execution outcome s(r)

i ∼ Ptask (s | d(r)

i ). This decouples 

user intent evolution from execution reliability , enhancing transition controllability and interpretability. Tools collapsing to the null state are removed from the context, enabling dynamic lifecycle management. 6HONOR 

3.1.2 Context Evolution and Task Composition Strategy 

To simulate natural topic convergence, we introduce a context decision variable c(r) ∈ { inherit , switch }

at each turn. The topic-switching probability follows an exponential decay: 

Pswitch (r) = max (pmin , p0 · αr−1), (2) where p0 = 0.10, α = 0.85, and pmin = 0.01. This ensures early-turn diversity while progressively enhancing contextual consistency. For task composition, we sample from three structural modes: single-tool, multi-tool collaboration, and multi-intent parallelism. New tasks can be dynamically injected during context inheritance to maintain dialogue density. Tool sampling employs either global random weighting or scene-based knowledge guidance. The latter ensures logical self-consistency of domain-specific tool combinations via predefined or LLM-generated scene templates. 

3.1.3 Dual-Channel Decoupled Generation and Quality Constraints 

Conditioned on state configuration, context, and dialogue history, we employ a dual-channel mechanism to separately synthesize user queries q(r) and assistant responses o(r). The user-side prompt integrates tool lists, state trajectories, style features, and slot-missing indicators, enforcing natural connectors over mechanical delimiters. The assistant-side prompt is strictly governed by state semantics (e.g., confirming success, explaining failures, or remaining silent), ensuring precise alignment with the underlying state machine. To ensure corpus authenticity, prompts incorporate four hard constraints: (i) “one-tool-one-request” atomicity to prevent implicit multi-tasking; (ii) colloquial conversion of tool vocabulary; (iii) tempo-ral expression consistency; and (iv) strict prohibition of redundant expressions (e.g., summarizing or appeasing) during silence states. This quality control layer guarantees both linguistic naturalness and logical rigor. 

3.1.4 Fine-Grained Annotation and Evaluation Support 

At the output end of the pipeline, an independent task decomposition module maps user requests con-taining multiple intents into an atomic task sequence At and establishes semantic associations with the candidate tool set Tcand ,t :

qt , Ht → At → Tcand ,t . (3) This three-level annotation ( context –tasks –tools ) supports ranking metrics and precisely localizes model failures (e.g., in context understanding, decomposition, or retrieval), providing a structured diagnostic basis. The final dataset records comprehensive metadata (e.g., dialogue context, execution states, decomposi-tion results, and tool descriptions), forming a structured corpus for training, evaluation, and attribution analysis. Complete transition matrices, prompt templates, and data formats are detailed in the Appendix. 

3.2 Joint Reward Mechanism 

In the scenario of contextual task atomization, the efficacy of model-generated decomposition results should not be determined solely by superficial textual rationality, but rather by their actual contribution 7HONOR I need to fly to Shanghai 

> tomorrow afternoon.
> Sure, from which city
> are you departing?
> Got it. Do you prefer a
> budget or business hotel?
> Policy Model
> Reference
> Model

…

> KL Divergence
> Constraint

𝑦 𝑡 

> (1)

𝑦 𝑡 

> (𝐵 )

…

𝑦 𝑡  

> (2)
> Candidate
> Decompositions
> Preference
> Reward

𝑅 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑓  

> Counterfactual
> Reward

𝑅 𝑐𝑓  

> Mixed Reward =

𝑅 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙     

> 𝑤 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑓 𝑅 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑓 +(1−𝑤 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑓 )𝑅 𝑐𝑓

𝑅 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 

> (1)

𝑅 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 

> (2)

𝑅 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 

> (𝐵 )

…

> Reward Output

Preference Reward 𝑹 𝒑𝒓𝒆𝒇  Counterfactual Reward 𝑹 𝒄𝒇 

Preference Reward Model 

Multi -turn Dialogue  Gradient Update 

> Evaluate logical coherence
> Evaluate Contextual Faithfulness

𝑅 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑓 = σ(𝑠 ϕ(𝑥 , 𝑦 𝑖 ) − 𝑠 ϕ(𝑥 , 𝑦 ∗))   

> From Beijing, and book a
> hotel near the Bund.

𝑋  𝐷  𝑌 

𝑍 

𝑋  𝐷  𝑌 

𝑍 

∆ 𝐷 ; 𝑋 =

𝐸 𝑌 𝑑𝑜 𝐷 = 𝛿 , 𝑋 − 𝐸 [𝑌 |𝑑𝑜 𝐷 = 𝛿 0 , 𝑋 ]

> Causal Effect of Decomposition

𝑅 𝑐𝑓 = 𝜆 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘 𝑚𝑎𝑥 (0, Δ𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘 ) + 𝜆 𝑐𝑜𝑣 Δ𝑐𝑜𝑣      

> Intervention Implementation
> (a) Observational
> Correlation (b) Causal Intervention
> Perspective
> Structural Causal Model
> :the do -intervention

∆𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘 = 𝑁 𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑚 − 𝑁 𝑟𝑎𝑤 

Figure 3: Overview of the preference-guided counterfactual task decomposition mechanism in MagicSelector. It is worth noting that Sφ denotes the preference reward model, R(·) represents the downstream tool retrieval model, and the scoring function M (·) is implemented using NDCG as the evaluation metric. to downstream tool retrieval performance and the semantic quality of the decomposition structure itself. To this end, we propose a joint reward mechanism that integrates counterfactual causal feedback with preference alignment, guiding the policy model to learn optimal semantic decomposition paths. 

3.2.1 Counterfactual Baseline Construction and Reward Mechanism 

Given a multi-turn context x = ( H, q) and target tools G (see Figure 3), a retriever RK (·) outputs a top-K

tool list. The non-intervention baseline is T K

raw = RK (x). Its alignment with G is measured by NDCG@K: 

Nraw = NDCG@K (T K

raw , G ) = 1

ZKK

# ∑

j=1

2I[t j ∈G ] − 1log 2( j + 1) , (4) where t j ∈ T K

raw and ZK is the ideal normalization factor. Nraw serves as the counterfactual baseline, representing retrieval quality without task decomposition. For an atomization candidate yi ∼ πθ (·| x) generated by policy πθ , we parse its sub-tasks A (yi) = 

{a1, . . . , am}. Retrieving tools independently for each sub-task yields T Kj = RK (a j). After dedupli-cation and fusion, we obtain the atomized retrieval list T K

atom , with its ranking quality denoted as Natom =

NDCG@K (T K

atom , G ).

3.2.2 Positive Counterfactual Gain and Completeness Constraint 

To explicitly quantify the causal impact of task atomization on retrieval efficacy while preserving com-pleteness, we define the counterfactual reward as a linear combination of positive ranking gain and cov-erage completeness: 

Rcf = λndcg max (0, Natom − Nraw ) + λfull (I[G ⊆ T K

atom ] − I[G ⊆ T K

raw ]) .

The first term, max (0, Natom − Nraw ), acts as a unidirectional dense reward. By filtering out non-positive gains, it strictly incentivizes decompositions that outperform the raw query, thereby providing stable 8HONOR 

gradients and mitigating biases from inherent sample difficulty. The second term utilizes an indicator function to enforce full-coverage completeness, ensuring no essential tools are omitted during ranking optimization. λndcg and λfull are weighting hyperparameters. 

3.3 Preference Reward Modeling 

To address the semantic limitations of pure retrieval metrics, we introduce a preference reward Rpref 

guided by a Process Reward Model (PRM). The PRM evaluates decompositions across five dimensions: completeness, accuracy, coreference resolution, standardized expression, and contextual consistency. Let sφ (x, y) denote the PRM score for a generated result y given context x, and y⋆ be the human-annotated reference. The preference reward quantifies the relative advantage of the candidate over the reference: 

Rpref = σ  sφ (x, yi) − sφ (x, y⋆), (5) where σ (·) is the Sigmoid function. This contrastive design effectively aligns the generated outputs with expert-level logical coherence and instruction adherence. During GRPO optimization, the objective counterfactual reward and subjective preference reward are fused into the total training signal: 

R = αRpref + β Rcf . (6) This joint formulation ensures the policy model simultaneously optimizes retrieval efficacy and semantic compliance, fostering robust and human-aligned task atomization capabilities. 

3.4 Group Relative Policy Optimization 

To achieve efficient policy optimization without training an independent value network (Critic), we adopt Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) (Guo et al., 2025). For each input xt , GRPO samples a group of B candidate outputs {y1, . . . , yB} from the old policy πθold and computes their corresponding reward scores R = {R1, . . . , RB} based on the joint reward formulation defined above. The advantage function for each sample is estimated via group-wise normalization: 

Ai = Ri − mean (R)

std (R) + ε . (7) This approach leverages relative performance within the group to replace absolute value estimation, significantly reducing memory overhead and enhancing training stability. The optimization objective is defined as: 

JGRPO (θ ) = Ex∼D,{yi}∼ πθold 

"

1

B

> B

# ∑

> i=1



min (ri(θ )Ai, clip (ri(θ ), 1 − ε, 1 + ε)Ai)

− β DKL (πθ || πre f )

#

,

(8) where ri(θ ) = πθ (yi|xt )   

> πθold (yi|xt)

is the importance sampling ratio, and DKL denotes the KL divergence penalty relative to a reference model πre f . In this work, we integrate the proposed joint reward (incorporating the Counterfactual NDCG Reward and Preference Reward) into this framework to drive the targeted evolution of task decomposition strategies. 9HONOR 

4 RETRIEVAL AND RERANKING 

Practical tool retrieval needs to balance scalability and fine-grained discrimination. Large tool libraries make exhaustive matching impractical, while complex user instructions often differ substantially from tool documentation. To address these difficulties, we adopt a two-stage retrieval and reranking pipeline. The first stage performs embedding-based retrieval over the full tool library, while the second stage applies a cross-encoder reranker to the recalled candidates. Given a query or decomposed atomic task q and a tool library T = {t1, . . . , tN }, the embedding retriever first returns a high-recall candidate set: 

Cq = RKr (q, T ), Cq ⊂ T . (9) This stage reduces the search space from the full library to a smaller set of potentially relevant tools, making subsequent fine-grained matching computationally feasible. The reranker then assigns each candidate tool a relevance score s(q,ti) and sorts the candidates in de-scending order: 

[t(1), . . . , t(m)] = Top-m↓ (s(q,ti), ti ∈ Cq) . (10) This second stage focuses computation on ambiguous candidates, especially tools with overlapping de-scriptions or similar functions. During training, self-distillation-driven hard negative mining further se-lects high-scoring but incorrect tools as informative negatives, improving discrimination without adding online inference cost. Figure 4 summarizes the training workflow of the retrieval and reranking module. 1. Initial Training        

> Queries
> Positive Tools
> Random Negatives
> Initial Train Dataset
> Embed Training
> InfoNCE
> Rerank Training
> Pointwise + Listwise
> Initial Retriever Initial Reranker
> Initial Models

2. Hard Negative Mining       

> Train Tool Pool Queries
> Initial Models Score Tools
> Filter positives Retain Top -knegatives
> Hard Negative Datasets

3. Hard -negative Retraining       

> Embed Re training
> InfoNCE
> Rerank Re training
> Pointwise + Listwise
> Final Models
> Final Retriever Final Reranker
> Positive Tools
> Hard Negatives
> Queries
> Hard Negative Train Datasets

Figure 4: Overview of the training workflow of the retrieval and progressive reranking module in MagicSelector. The module first trains an embedding retriever and a reranker with random negatives, then mines high-scoring incorrect tools from the training tool pool as hard negatives. The hard-negative dataset is used to retrain both models and obtain enhanced retrieval and reranking models. 

4.1 Embedding-based Retriever Training 

The embedding retriever is designed to handle the scalability requirement of large tool libraries. Since applying a cross-encoder reranker to every tool would be prohibitively expensive, we first encode queries and tool descriptions into a shared dense vector space and perform approximate nearest neighbor search. This stage prioritizes recall rather than final precision. Its goal is to retain potentially relevant tools in the candidate set, including tools whose descriptions differ lexically from the user query but remain semantically related. Training encourages matched query-tool pairs to be closer than irrelevant pairs in this space. 10 HONOR 

Let Eψ (·) denote the embedding model parameterized by ψ. For a query or decomposed atomic task q

and a tool t, their dense representations are 

eq = Eψ (q), et = Eψ (t). (11) We compute relevance with cosine similarity, sim (q,t) = cos (eq, et ), (12) which is equivalent to inner product when the vectors are normalized. We train the embedding model with a contrastive objective. Given a query q, a positive tool t+, and a set of negative tools {t− 

> 1

, . . . , t− 

> M

}, we use the following InfoNCE loss. 

Lemb = − log exp (sim (q,t+)/τ)

exp (sim (q,t+)/τ) + ∑Mj=1 exp (sim (q,t− 

> j

)/τ) , (13) where τ is a temperature coefficient. The loss pulls matched query-tool pairs closer and pushes irrelevant tools away, producing an embedding space suitable for approximate nearest neighbor search. During inference, all tool descriptions are encoded offline and indexed by an approximate nearest neigh-bor search engine. For each query or atomic task, the retriever returns the top-Kr tools by embedding similarity. 

Cq = Top-Kr (sim (q,ti),ti ∈ T ) . (14) The candidate set Cq is then passed to the reranker for more precise relevance estimation. 

4.2 Progressive Reranker Training 

Although the embedding retriever provides efficient recall, its bi-encoder architecture compresses the query and each tool description independently. As a result, it cannot fully model fine-grained token-level interactions between heterogeneous user expressions and tool documentation. This limitation is especially harmful when multiple candidate tools share similar surface descriptions but differ in subtle functional constraints, input schemas, or execution effects. To resolve these ambiguities, we introduce a cross-encoder reranker, which takes each query-tool pair as joint input and outputs a relevance score. Compared with the retriever, the reranker directly models query-tool interactions and is therefore better suited for ordering semantically similar candidates. Let Rω denote the reranker parameterized by ω. Given a query q and a candidate tool ti ∈ Cq, the reranker computes 

si = s(q,ti) = Rω (q,ti). (15) The final tool ranking is obtained by sorting all candidate tools according to si in descending order. We train the reranker in two stages. Point-wise training first builds a basic relevance scorer, and list-wise training then optimizes the relative order of tools within the candidate list. 

4.2.1 Point-wise Training 

In the first stage, the reranker learns to judge each query-tool pair independently. Each pair (q,ti) has a binary relevance label yi ∈ { 0, 1}, where yi = 1 means that ti is a ground-truth tool for q. The point-wise loss is 

Lpoint = − [yi log σ (s(q,ti)) + ( 1 − yi) log (1 − σ (s(q,ti)))] , (16) where σ (·) denotes the sigmoid function. This stage gives the model a stable relevance scoring function before list-wise ranking optimization. 11 HONOR 

4.2.2 List-wise Training 

Point-wise training treats each pair independently, but retrieval quality depends on the relative order of tools in the candidate list. We continue training with a list-wise objective that models the ranking distribution over the whole candidate set. For a query q and its candidate list Cq = {t1, . . . , tn}, the reranker produces the score vector 

sq = [ s(q,t1), . . . , s(q,tn)] . (17) We convert the scores into a predicted ranking distribution. 

Pi = exp (s(q,ti)) 

∑nj=1 exp (s(q,t j)) . (18) Given a target distribution P∗ 

> i

derived from ground-truth relevance labels, the list-wise loss is 

Llist = −

> n

# ∑

> i=1

P∗ 

> i

log Pi. (19) This objective encourages the reranker to place more probability mass on relevant tools and improves the ordering among semantically similar candidates. 

4.3 Self-Distillation Driven Hard Negative Mining 

Negative samples strongly affect both retriever and reranker training. Random negatives are often far from the query and easy for the model to reject, which gives weak learning signals. We use self-distillation-driven hard negative mining to expose the model to harder mistakes. The current model scores candidate tools, and its high-scoring incorrect predictions are selected as hard negatives for the next model. Because the supervision comes from the model itself and the student keeps the same archi-tecture, we call this procedure self-distillation. The strategy is model-agnostic and can be applied to either the embedding retriever or the reranker. Let 

fθ denote the model being enhanced. For the retriever, s(q,t) is the embedding similarity sim (q,t). For the reranker, it is the cross-encoder output Rω (q,t). We first train an initial model with the corresponding base objective and randomly sampled negative tools. For each query q, we construct tuples (q,t+,t−),where t+ is a ground-truth tool and t− is a random negative tool. The induced pairwise loss is 

Lpair = − log σ (s(q,t+) − s(q,t−)) . (20) This stage yields an initial model fθ0 with basic semantic matching ability. In practice, the mined neg-atives can be added to the retriever’s contrastive objective or to the reranker’s point-wise and list-wise objectives. After initial training, iteration r uses the current model fθr as a teacher to score candidate tools. To keep teacher scoring tractable, especially for the cross-encoder reranker, we draw the candidate pool Cq ⊆ T

from the top tools returned by the current retriever instead of scoring the entire library. For each query q

and candidate tool ti ∈ Cq, the teacher score is 

sr(q,ti) = fθr (q,ti). (21) The candidate tools are then ranked by these scores. 12 HONOR 

After removing all ground-truth tools Gq, we select the top-ranked incorrect tools as hard negatives. 

T −

> hard

(q) = Top-k{ti | ti ∈ Cq, ti /∈ Gq, ranked by sr(q,ti)}. (22) These hard negatives receive high relevance scores from the teacher model but are not correct tools. They expose the model’s current confusion patterns and provide stronger supervision than random negatives. The reconstructed training tuples are 

(q,t+,t−

> hard

), t− 

> hard

∈ T −

> hard

(q). (23) The model is retrained on the new data to obtain an improved student model fθr+1 . The process can be repeated iteratively. 

fθr → hard negative mining → fθr+1 . (24) Through this self-distillation process, the model repeatedly revisits its own failure cases and becomes better at distinguishing semantically similar tools. 

Algorithm 1 Self-Distillation Driven Hard Negative Mining  

> 1:

Input Training queries Q, tool library T , ground-truth tool sets {Gq}q∈Q, hard negative number k,iteration number R 

> 2:

Initialize Construct initial tuples (q,t+,t−) with randomly sampled negatives t− /∈ Gq 

> 3:

Train an initial model fθ0 using the corresponding base training objective  

> 4:

for r = 0 to R − 1 do  

> 5:

Teacher scoring  

> 6:

for each query q ∈ Q do  

> 7:

Retrieve a candidate pool Cq ⊆ T with the current retriever  

> 8:

Compute teacher scores sr(q,ti) = fθr (q,ti) for each candidate tool ti ∈ Cq 

> 9:

Rank candidate tools according to sr(q,ti) in descending order  

> 10:

Remove all ground-truth tools Gq from the ranked list  

> 11:

Select the top-k remaining tools as hard negatives 

T −

> hard

(q) = Top-k{ti | ti ∈ Cq, ti /∈ Gq, ranked by sr(q,ti)} 

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

Training data reconstruction  

> 14:

Construct hard-negative training tuples (q,t+,t−

> hard

), where t+ ∈ Gq and t− 

> hard

∈ T −

> hard

(q) 

> 15:

Student retraining  

> 16:

Train a new student model fθr+1 with the reconstructed hard-negative training tuples  

> 17:

end for  

> 18:

Return Enhanced retriever or reranker fθR

For the retriever, hard negatives improve the dense retrieval space by forcing the model to separate tools with similar surface descriptions but different functions. For the reranker, they strengthen fine-grained relevance discrimination among highly similar candidate tools. The process does not require extra human annotation, so it scales naturally to large tool libraries. Overall, the module has two coupled but distinct flows. Training starts from initial retriever and reranker models, mines hard negatives through self-distillation, and produces enhanced models. Inference applies the enhanced retriever and reranker in a simple cascade. High-recall Retrieval → High-precision Reranking → Ranked Tool List . (25) This design keeps online retrieval efficient while improving the retriever’s recall structure and the reranker’s precision. 13 HONOR 

5 ADAPTIVE TOP-K 

In tool retrieval tasks for Large Language Models (LLMs), traditional fixed Top-K truncation methods struggle to balance recall and contextual redundancy across queries of varying complexity. To address this issue, this paper proposes a dual semantic boundary-aware dynamic Top-K algorithm. This algorithm treats the reranked tool list as a one-dimensional semantic space and adaptively determines the optimal truncation position by jointly evaluating the absolute relevance decay between the query and tools, as well as the relative semantic gap between adjacent tools. Specifically, our proposed truncation strategy based on the tool-tool relative semantic gap is inspired by the TextTiling algorithm (Hearst, 1997). We generalize the classical mechanism of detecting similarity gaps between adjacent text blocks into the tool semantic space constructed by dense retrieval models. By integrating the tool functional clustering characteristics revealed by ToolLLM (Qin et al., 2024a) and Anytool (Du et al., 2024b), alongside the notion from Rankvicuna (Pradeep et al., 2023) which conceptualizes the reranked list as a one-dimensional sequence with local contextual coherence, our approach demonstrates that the embedding similarity gap between functional descriptions of adjacent tools in the reranked list serves as an effective signal for identifying tool functional boundaries. 

5.1 Characteristics of Tool Reranking Score Distribution Based on the Pareto Distribution 

In the retrieval and reranking tasks for large-scale tool libraries, we observe that the distribution of tool reranking scores exhibits a significant long-tail characteristic, closely approximating a Pareto distribu-tion (Newman, 2005). Specifically, for a given complex user query, only a minuscule fraction of tools within the tool semantic space can precisely match the user intent, forming the high-scoring head; con-versely, the vast majority of tools are functionally orthogonal or exhibit only weak marginal relevance to the query, causing their scores to decay rapidly and constitute a massive low-scoring long tail. 

Figure 5: Reranking score distribution of retrieved tools As illustrated in Figure 5, we conduct an empirical analysis of the reranking score distribution for tools recalled by the agent across different scenarios. The statistics encompass a single-turn dataset (6,930 instances), a multi-task dataset (2,990 instances), and a multi-turn dataset (3,706 instances). The obser-vations reveal that, regardless of whether the scenario involves simple single-turn queries or complex multi-task and multi-turn interactions, the reranking scores consistently demonstrate a highly uniform Pareto-like long-tail decay. This phenomenon intuitively reflects that only a select few core tools attain 14 HONOR 

high matching scores in real-world interactive tasks, whereas the overwhelming majority of candidate tools rapidly decay and cluster in the low-scoring tail region. Let the reranking score be a random variable X. Under the assumption of a Pareto distribution, its probability density function can be approximately expressed as: 

f (x) = αxα

> m

xα+1 (x ≥ xm) (26) where xm is the lower bound threshold of the relevance score, and α is the shape parameter determining the decay rate of the tail. This distributional characteristic profoundly reveals the extreme imbalance of relevance distribution within the tool semantic space. The steep decay characteristic of the Pareto distribution in the head region provides robust theoretical support for our proposed dynamic Top-K strategy based on dual semantic boundary awareness. Since the actual relevance scores often experience a sharp, precipitous drop after a few head tools, the traditional fixed-K truncation method ignores this non-uniform distribution and is highly prone to crossing the inflection point into the long-tail region, thereby introducing substantial redundant noise into the context of the large language model. In contrast, leveraging the natural gap characteristic of the Pareto distribution, our algorithm jointly evaluates the absolute relevance decay and the relative semantic gap between adjacent tools. This enables the model to adaptively strip away long-tail noise, maximizing the semantic purity of the input context while ensuring the recall rate of core tools. 

5.2 Recall-Maximizing Fusion Strategy 

Given a user query q and an ordered list of candidate tools T = [ t1, . . . , tn] output by a reranking model. For any tool ti in the list, its relevance score with respect to the query is denoted as si = score (q,ti). Since 

T is sorted in descending order based on si, this list inherently forms a one-dimensional relevance space. 

Algorithm 2 Recall-Maximizing Fusion Strategy  

> 1:

Input: Sorted candidate tools T = {t1, . . . , tn}, reranking scores S = {s1, . . . , sn}, tool description embeddings E = {e1, . . . , en} 

> 2:

Initialize: Kscore ← 0, Ksim ← 0 

> 3:

Score-based Truncation:  

> 4:

Calculate score gaps ∆si = si − si+1 for i ∈ { 1, . . . , n − 1} 

> 5:

Kscore = arg max i(∆si) # Truncate at the maximum reranking score gap  

> 6:

Semantic-based Truncation:  

> 7:

Calculate adjacent tool similarities sim i = CosineSim (ei, ei+1) for i ∈ { 1, . . . , n − 1} 

> 8:

Calculate similarity gaps ∆sim i = sim i − sim i+1 for i ∈ { 1, . . . , n − 2} # Measure the semantic drop between adjacent tools  

> 9:

Ksim = arg max i(∆sim i) # Truncate at the maximum semantic similarity gap  

> 10:

Recall-Maximizing Fusion:  

> 11:

Kfinal = max (Kscore , Ksim ) # Take the maximum K to ensure high recall  

> 12:

Return: Final truncated tool list Tfinal = {t1, . . . , tKfinal }

To capture the degradation of relevance within the tool list, we compute the first-order difference of the scores between adjacent tools. The position exhibiting the maximum score gap typically signifies the boundary separating relevant tools from noisy ones (Taguchi et al., 2025; Xia et al., 2025). Therefore, 15 HONOR 

the candidate truncation point based on the score difference is defined as: Top_K score = arg max 

> i

(si − si+1) (27) Relying solely on the degradation of si is prone to failure when the scores decrease smoothly. To address this, we further conceptualize the reranked list as a one-dimensional continuous semantic space and introduce a metric for the semantic coherence between adjacent tools. Let sim i = sim (ti,ti+1) denote the cosine similarity between the functional description embeddings of adjacent tools ti and ti+1. Within this one-dimensional sequence, a sharp drop in sim i indicates an abrupt shift in tool or functional clusters. We interpret such abrupt shifts as clustering boundaries within the one-dimensional space, and compute the point of maximum similarity difference as the second candidate truncation point: Top_K sim = arg max 

> i

(sim i − sim i+1) (28) Considering the low tolerance for false negatives in tool retrieval tasks, we adopt a conservative boundary fusion strategy. We define the final truncation position as the maximum of the two aforementioned candidate truncation points: Final_Top_K = max (Top_K score , Top_K sim ) (29) When the degradation of relevance scores is not pronounced, Top_K sim can acutely capture the semantic discontinuities in the underlying tool functions. Conversely, when local tool functions are similar but the overall relevance has already dropped significantly, Top_K score provides a fundamental truncation safeguard. The operation of taking the maximum essentially maximizes the recall of potentially relevant tools under the premise of ensuring that semantic coherence and relevance remain intact.The complete procedure of our proposed method is summarized in Algorithm 2. Furthermore, by only computing the score and semantic differences between adjacent tools, the time complexity of our strategy is strictly bounded to O(n), avoiding the high computational overhead of 

O(n2) associated with global pairwise comparisons. 

6 EXPERIMENTS 

We comprehensively evaluate the proposed framework across a diverse suite of benchmarks that capture complementary dimensions of tool-oriented agents: ToolBench for realistic API invocations, ToolRet for large-scale tool retrieval, and MTDTool for multi-turn mobile interactions. Our empirical study is specifically designed to rigorously assess the efficacy of MagicSelector in retrieving relevant tools from extensive repositories, optimizing candidate ranking, and demonstrating robust generalization across varied query formulations and annotation paradigms. 

6.1 Evaluation Benchmarks ToolBench (Qin et al., 2024b). As a comprehensive real-world API benchmark, ToolBench features 16,464 RESTful APIs across 49 categories and roughly 126k instruction-solution pairs spanning diverse single- and multi-tool scenarios. In our evaluation, it serves as a rigorous testbed to assess whether the agent can accurately retrieve prerequisite tools from a massive structured library, a crucial step that dictates downstream execution performance. 16 HONOR 

ToolRet. ToolRet (Shi et al., 2025) aggregates 35 datasets across Web, Code, and Custom domains, featuring a corpus of 44K tools. Following ToolQP, its training set comprises 10K Web-domain instances with trajectories synthesized via Qwen3.6-Plus. For evaluation, 3.1K Web samples serve as the In-Domain test set (tools exposed during training), while the remainder forms the Out-Domain test set. 

MTDTool. MTDTool specifically constructed for complex multi-turn mobile interactions, encompassing 237 vertical-domain tools. Its test set is correspondingly partitioned into In-Domain and out-of-domain subsets based on tool vertical domains. 

6.2 Baselines 

To comprehensively evaluate task decomposition and tool retrieval performance, we compare against three categories of baselines: (1) closed-source LLMs (GPT-5.0 1, Qwen3-series (Yang et al., 2025), MiniMax-M2.5 2, and DeepSeek-V4-Pro 3) to establish zero-shot and few-shot performance upper bounds; (2) prompting-based methods(Q2E (Wang et al., 2023), ReInvoke (Chen et al., 2024a), ToolReAGt (Braun-schweiler et al., 2025), and PLUTO (Huang et al., 2024b)), representing training-free paradigms that leverage structured retrieval augmentation or chain-of-thought; and (3) ToolQP (Fang & Glass, 2026), an RL-based method that jointly optimizes decomposition and retrieval via mixed reward signals. 

6.3 Experimental Configuration 

By default, our retrieval and reranking backbone employs Qwen3-Embedding-4B for dense retrieval and Qwen3-Reranker-4B for cross-encoder reranking (Zhang et al., 2025). 

ToolBench configuration. Following ToolOmni (Huang et al., 2026), we evaluate ToolBench under three instruction difficulty levels (I1–I3) and three generalization splits: Instruction, Tool, and Category. We consider two settings: in-domain , where models are trained and tested within the same domain, and 

multi-domain , where models are trained on the full dataset. Unless otherwise specified, retrieval is con-ducted in an open-domain setting, where each query retrieves tools from the complete tool corpus rather than a pre-filtered API list. Baselines include BM25 (Robertson & Zaragoza, 2009), EmbSim (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019), Re-Invoke (Chen et al., 2024b), IterFeedback (Xu et al., 2024), ToolGen (Wang et al., 2025b), ToolRetriever (Qin et al., 2024b), and ToolOmni (Huang et al., 2026). Retrieval performance is measured by NDCG@ k, where k ∈ { 1, 3, 5}.

ToolRet configuration. Following the setting of Tool-DE (Lu et al., 2025), both training and evaluation use the instruction-augmented ToolRet format. All methods retrieve from the full tool library, and we report NDCG@10 (N@10), Recall@10 (R@10), and Completeness@10 (C@10). 

MTDTool configuration. MTDTool is our self-constructed domain-specific dataset for multi-turn mo-bile tool retrieval. We evaluate in-domain and out-of-domain splits defined by tool vertical domains. The comparison includes four selected embedding–reranking combinations: Qwen3-Embedding-8B with Qwen3-Reranker-8B (Zhang et al., 2025), gte-Qwen2-7B-instruct (Alibaba NLP, 2024; Li et al., 2023b) with Qwen3-Reranker-8B (Zhang et al., 2025), E5-Mistral-7B-Instruct (Wang et al., 2024a) with Qwen3-Reranker-8B (Zhang et al., 2025), and Qwen3-Embedding-4B with Qwen3-Reranker-4B (Zhang et al., 2025). We report NDCG@10, Recall@10, and Completeness@10. 

> 1https://chat.openai.com/
> 2https://minimaxi.com/news/minimax-m25
> 3https://www.deepseek.com/

17 HONOR 

Table 1: Overall performance comparison of MagicSelector and baselines across benchmarks. Best results are bolded.                                                     

> Methods ToolRet MTDTool ToolBench
> N@10 C@10 N@10 C@10 N@1 N@3 N@5
> Prompting Methods
> ReInvoke 47.06 49.26 80.38 74.82 61.3 –58.2 Q2E 46.09 47.77 62.55 56.18 27.0 27.9 31.0 ToolReAGt 42.09 46.80 79.09 72.35 44.8 44.2 47.5 PLUTO 44.95 49.65 76.42 61.05 47.4 45.9 47.7
> Dense Retrievers & Rerankers
> Ours-Embedding-4B 54.23 53.71 91.36 87.65 83.1 87.8 87.1 + Ours-Rerank-4B 59.44 58.90 96.00 95.71 85.7 90.7 90.6 + Ours-Decomp + Ours-Rerank-4B 59.90 59.21 96.28 96.01 84.2 90.7 90.8

6.4 Main Results 

We report the main retrieval results on ToolBench, ToolRet, and MTDTool in Tables 1–4. These bench-marks cover complementary retrieval scenarios: ToolBench evaluates API-level tool selection under realistic tool-use instructions, ToolRet measures large-scale retrieval over heterogeneous tool domains, and MTDTool focuses on multi-turn mobile interactions with in-domain and out-of-domain splits. Un-less otherwise specified, methods retrieve from the full tool corpus defined by each benchmark or split. Across these benchmarks, we compare three model configurations: an embedding-only retriever, an embedding–reranking pipeline, and a full pipeline that further incorporates the decomposition model before retrieval. As illustrated in Table 1, we report the overall retrieval performance of our proposed MagicSelector framework against various baselines across three diverse benchmarks: ToolRet, MTDTool, and Tool-Bench. MagicSelector consistently achieves state-of-the-art performance, demonstrating superior effi-cacy over prompting-based methods. We evaluate our approach through three progressive stages: the foundational embedding model, the integration of a specialized reranker, and the complete pipeline fea-turing query decomposition. Our foundational embedding model establishes a remarkably strong baseline that significantly outper-forms all prompting-based methods (e.g., ReInvoke, Q2E, ToolReAGt, and PLUTO). For instance, on ToolRet, it achieves 54.23 N@10 and 53.71 C@10, substantially surpassing the best prompting method, ReInvoke (47.06 N@10). Similar massive advantages are observed on MTDTool (91.36 vs. 80.38 N@10) and ToolBench (83.1 vs. 61.3 N@1). Furthermore, integrating our specialized reranking module provides exceptional refinement capabilities by re-evaluating the initial retrieved candidates. This addition boosts the N@10 on MTDTool from 91.36 to 96.00, and significantly improves performance across ToolBench, achieving the highest N@1 score of 85.7. The complete pipeline, which synergistically combines our query decomposition model with the spe-cialized reranker, yields the highest overall metrics. It sets a new state-of-the-art across the datasets, peaking at 59.90 N@10 and 59.21 C@10 on ToolRet, and 96.28 N@10 and 96.01 C@10 on MTDTool. On ToolBench, the decomposition strategy provides crucial additional gains for broader candidate pools, reaching top results of 90.7 N@3 and 90.8 N@5. This validates that combining structural query de-composition with precise reranking provides the most robust and adaptable architecture for complex tool 18 HONOR 

Table 2: Overall performance comparison on the MTDTool benchmark under in-domain and out-of-domain settings. Best and second-best results are bolded and underlined, respectively. 

Methods In-Domain Out-of-Domain N@10 C@10 N@10 C@10 

Base Retriever 

Qwen3-Embedding-4B 68.35 61.79 50.57 42.22 

Closed-Source LLMs 

MiniMax-M2.5 84.11 79.18 74.51 70.18 DeepSeek-V4-Pro 83.06 78.70 73.26 69.22 Qwen3.7-Max 85.62 80.21 75.79 71.43 ChatGPT-5.0 82.81 82.50 73.22 74.24 

Prompting Methods (Qwen3-4B) 

Q2E 74.97 67.50 61.77 51.68 ReInvoke 84.27 77.87 79.73 74.64 ToolReAGt 77.09 68.81 72.54 64.58 PLUTO 77.69 56.29 77.29 58.11 

RL-Based Methods (Qwen3-4B) 

ToolQP 86.72 76.99 74.60 68.28 Ours-Decomp 89.17 84.11 78.82 74.87 

Prompting Methods (Qwen3-8B) 

Q2E 73.01 66.16 56.61 49.64 ReInvoke 80.27 76.21 74.65 71.31 ToolReAGt 81.20 74.57 76.98 70.12 PLUTO 76.91 61.73 75.93 60.36 

RL-Based Methods (Qwen3-8B) 

ToolQP 89.72 83.61 77.92 74.33 Ours-Decomp 91.19 87.08 82.74 79.77 

Dense Retrievers & Rerankers 

gte-Qwen2-7B-instruct 65.89 59.62 59.18 53.26 + Qwen3-Reranker-8B 81.30 83.78 76.46 82.52 E5-Mistral-7B-Instruct 69.42 64.97 55.47 47.35 + Qwen3-Reranker-8B 81.84 85.08 77.21 82.23 Qwen3-Embedding-8B 71.27 63.43 63.99 55.21 + Qwen3-Reranker-8B 81.82 84.90 78.40 85.29 + Ours-Rerank-4B 97.01 93.20 94.88 93.44 Qwen3-Embedding-4B 69.49 62.10 57.69 47.64 + Qwen3-Reranker-4B 82.39 85.33 77.52 81.48 + Ours-Rerank-4B 96.88 92.51 93.52 89.72 

Ours 97.22 95.33 95.33 96.69 

retrieval. Table 2 reports results on MTDTool, which evaluates multi-turn mobile tool retrieval under both in-domain and out-of-domain settings. For the off-the-shelf embedding backbones, adding a Qwen3 reranker consistently improves N@10 and C@10, highlighting the importance of cross-encoder reranking for dis-tinguishing tools with similar descriptions and schemas. For example, adding Qwen3-Reranker-8B to Qwen3-Embedding-8B improves N@10 from 71.27 to 81.82 and C@10 from 63.43 to 84.90 in the in-19 HONOR 

domain split. Our RL-based decomposition model (Ours-Decomp) provides a stronger starting point than standard prompting methods, achieving 91.19 N@10 and 87.08 C@10 in the in-domain split, and 82.74 N@10 and 79.77 C@10 in the out-of-domain split. Combining off-the-shelf embeddings with our spe-cialized reranker (+ Ours-Rerank-4B) further improves completeness, especially on the out-of-domain split where C@10 reaches 93.44. After integrating both components, the full pipeline (Ours) achieves the best in-domain results (97.22 N@10, 95.33 C@10) and the best out-of-domain N@10 (95.33) and C@10 (96.69), suggesting that decomposition can further improve ranking when user instructions in-volve multi-turn or compound intents. On ToolBench, Table 3 shows that our proposed approach significantly improves performance under both in-domain and multi-domain evaluations. In the in-domain setting, our method achieves an average NDCG of 90.42, substantially outperforming the best baseline ToolOmni (80.4). Our approach achieves the highest scores across all I1, I2, and I3 metrics (e.g., 90.57 @1 for I1 and 84.50 @1 for I2). In the multi-domain setting, our framework similarly improves the average score over prior baselines (88.5 vs. 78.3 for ToolOmni), achieving the best overall results with notable gains in I1 and I3 (e.g., 92.1 @5 for I1 and 89.0 @5 for I3). These results indicate that our proposed method establishes a strong retrieval foundation and effectively improves candidate API ordering against a broader and more complex tool pool. Table 3: ToolBench retrieval performance measured by NDCG@ k (%).                                                                                                                                                                   

> Methods I1 I2 I3 Avg. @1 @3 @5 @1 @3 @5 @1 @3 @5
> In-Domain
> BM25* 29.5 31.1 33.3 24.1 25.3 27.7 32.0 25.9 29.8 28.7 EmbSim* 63.7 61.0 65.4 49.1 42.3 46.6 53.0 46.4 52.7 53.4 Re-Invoke* 69.5 –61.1 54.6 –53.8 59.7 –59.6 59.7 IterFeedback 71.6 71.3 76.3 62.7 55.6 60.6 73.9 64.1 69.0 67.2 ToolGen 69.5 72.3 79.1 46.8 53.6 62.5 77.1 76.4 85.5 69.2 ToolRetriever 81.9 82.1 85.6 75.9 69.6 75.4 79.8 72.4 77.1 77.8 ToolOmni 86.1 84.5 85.6 81.5 73.1 74.1 84.4 76.8 77.3 80.4
> Ours 90.57 93.95 93.74 84.50 88.62 87.94 89.00 93.37 92.13 90.42
> Multi-Domain
> BM25* 22.8 22.6 25.6 18.3 20.7 22.2 10.0 10.1 12.3 18.3 EmbSim* 54.0 50.8 55.9 40.8 36.7 39.6 18.0 17.8 20.7 37.1 IterFeedback 71.8 70.5 74.8 63.2 55.4 61.3 67.4 59.2 63.1 65.2 ToolGen 68.8 72.0 78.8 46.8 53.6 62.4 75.7 75.3 84.5 68.6 ToolRetriever 81.0 80.9 84.5 75.9 69.5 75.2 77.5 69.2 74.2 76.4 ToolOmni 86.1 84.1 84.8 80.6 73.0 73.9 78.9 71.4 71.8 78.3
> Ours 86.1 91.8 92.1 87.0 91.5 91.4 79.4 88.7 89.0 88.5

Table 4 evaluates retrieval performance on the diverse ToolRet library. Our proposed method achieves the best overall results, surpassing the strongest baseline pipeline with average scores of 59.90 N@10, 70.10 R@10, and 59.21 C@10. Specifically, our approach significantly outperforms all other models in the Web (52.78 N@10) and Code (66.63 N@10) domains. Although slightly trailing the best baseline in the Customized domain, our method secures the highest overall efficacy, demonstrating a robust and adaptable retrieval foundation for complex tool environments. Overall, the results support three observations. First, a trained embedding retriever provides a strong high-recall foundation for tool retrieval. Second, reranking generally improves the final ordering of can-20 HONOR 

Table 4: Retrieval performance on ToolRet under the instruction-based setting. 

Methods Web Code Customized Avg. N@10 R@10 C@10 N@10 R@10 C@10 N@10 R@10 C@10 N@10 R@10 C@10 

BM25s 26.33 34.22 22.79 41.90 56.49 55.39 41.16 48.60 38.90 36.46 46.44 39.03 COLT 28.91 40.64 38.83 20.06 27.78 18.84 31.29 42.19 34.01 26.75 36.87 30.56 Colbert 16.67 21.14 14.94 30.35 41.38 40.28 24.35 30.97 24.87 23.79 31.16 26.70 contriever-msmarco 23.48 30.21 19.69 31.61 43.01 41.74 21.93 27.28 23.04 25.67 33.50 28.16 gtr-t5-base 20.38 27.53 19.24 33.59 43.18 41.88 41.84 48.35 39.28 31.94 39.69 33.46 gtr-t5-large 24.37 31.64 21.26 36.76 47.42 45.92 42.04 50.84 40.00 34.39 43.30 35.73 all-MiniLM-L6-v2 12.77 19.38 13.33 31.59 43.86 42.25 32.24 43.55 32.34 25.53 35.60 29.31 e5-small-v2 26.42 34.44 21.39 32.36 42.38 41.11 34.62 42.29 32.58 31.14 39.70 31.69 e5-base-v2 24.71 33.45 21.94 31.40 42.83 41.38 38.06 46.84 36.43 31.39 41.04 33.25 e5-large-v2 23.62 32.19 21.80 34.27 44.42 43.19 43.32 52.30 41.42 33.73 42.97 35.47 gte-base-en-v1.5 30.75 39.44 25.88 41.68 53.96 51.64 37.95 46.57 38.10 36.79 46.66 38.54 gte-large-en-v1.5 28.06 36.32 22.57 35.77 49.56 47.71 37.27 47.98 35.84 33.70 44.62 35.37 bge-base-en-v1.5 25.95 35.12 23.40 35.15 45.74 44.32 43.20 53.54 42.29 34.77 44.80 36.67 bge-large-en-v1.5 30.03 39.28 25.63 41.53 52.76 51.18 43.90 51.79 42.24 38.49 47.94 39.68 e5-mistral-7b 31.07 41.30 27.04 44.97 58.95 56.79 40.88 49.35 38.35 38.97 49.87 40.73 NV-Embed-v1 31.51 40.52 26.74 47.92 62.07 59.60 48.70 57.69 43.88 42.71 53.43 43.41 gte-Qwen2-1.5B-inst. 37.53 48.31 30.95 47.38 61.12 59.55 52.98 59.47 45.68 45.96 56.30 45.39 GritLM-7B 36.58 46.01 27.65 41.26 53.81 52.07 45.55 54.01 41.40 41.13 51.28 40.37 mxbai-rerank-large-v1 17.53 25.82 17.95 33.86 47.84 46.47 26.83 37.61 28.60 26.08 37.09 31.01 monoT5-base-msmarco 23.33 30.70 18.13 31.39 45.18 42.53 37.77 46.63 39.70 28.72 40.84 33.45 bge-rerank-v2-m3 34.83 45.23 31.73 50.86 67.26 64.78 42.35 53.75 39.90 42.68 55.41 45.47 jina-rerank-v2-base 42.35 51.21 34.23 53.21 66.03 63.94 45.94 57.96 45.41 47.17 58.40 47.86 bge-rerank-v2-gemma 34.73 45.08 32.29 55.85 70.53 68.76 51.97 61.20 45.65 47.52 58.94 48.90 Mixtral-8x22B 35.31 38.63 34.60 33.27 39.60 38.53 34.40 39.72 38.20 34.33 39.32 37.11 gpt-3.5-turbo-0125 37.22 40.82 35.22 35.42 41.16 42.64 37.29 41.34 39.70 29.60 41.11 29.52 gpt-3.5-turbo-1106 38.31 41.29 35.76 38.69 42.57 42.81 39.30 43.31 37.31 38.77 42.39 38.63 Qwen3-Embedding-0.6B 38.22 46.17 28.47 48.60 62.29 60.06 42.58 49.93 40.38 43.13 52.80 42.97 Qwen3-Embedding-4B 40.90 50.14 31.97 53.56 71.12 69.61 42.15 50.80 40.22 45.54 57.36 47.27 Qwen3-Embedding-8B 41.61 50.23 32.56 53.43 69.21 67.29 43.59 53.13 42.73 46.21 57.52 47.52 Tool-DE-Embed-4B 45.60 55.50 37.62 54.66 69.51 67.87 54.11 63.96 48.53 51.46 62.99 51.34 + Tool-DE-Rerank-4B 48.37 59.72 43.78 59.93 75.88 74.38 62.72 68.92 52.79 57.01 68.17 56.98 

Ours 52.78 61.52 45.32 66.63 81.58 79.95 60.30 67.20 52.36 59.90 70.10 59.21 

didate tools, with clear gains in ranking and completeness metrics. Third, the decomposition model often brings additional ranking improvements in settings involving complex or multi-turn instructions, suggesting that query decomposition and tool reranking are complementary components rather than in-terchangeable alternatives. Table 5 and Figure 6 present the performance comparison between the traditional Completeness@10 (fixed-10) and the dynamic Completeness@k (adaptive-k) settings across three different datasets: Tool-Ret, ToolBench, and MTDTool. A consistent trend across all evaluated benchmarks is that the adaptive-k strategy consistently outperforms the fixed-10 approach. Specifically, compared to the standard Com-pleteness@10, the adaptive-k setting yields performance improvements of 1.34, 2.13, and 1.17 points on ToolRet, ToolBench, and MTDTool, respectively. Furthermore, the bar chart in Figure 6 explicitly illustrates how the system adaptively adjusts the average number of retrieved tools to achieve these scores. For example, the system achieves a high Completeness score of 89.43 on ToolBench while maintaining the lowest average tool count of 8.19. In contrast, for datasets requiring more comprehensive toolsets, it intelligently expands the retrieval size to 12.41 on ToolRet and 11.69 on MTDTool, successfully pushing the Completeness score on MTDTool to an impressive 97.18. These results demonstrate that dynamically adjusting the number of retrieved tools (Completeness@k) is more effective and flexible than using a rigid cutoff (Completeness@10), allowing 21 HONOR 

Table 5: Performance comparison with dynamic Top-K across datasets.         

> Dataset Avg fixed-10 adaptive-k
> ToolRet 59.21 60.55 ToolBench 87.30 89.43 MTDTool 96.01 97.18

the retrieval system to better accommodate queries of varying complexity and thereby enhancing the overall retrieval quality across different datasets. 

Figure 6: Performance comparison with dynamic Top-K across datasets. 

6.5 Dataset Evaluation 

We categorize MTDTool into two primary dialogue types, single-turn and multi-turn, which are further subdivided into 10 fine-grained scenario labels. Evaluation results in Table 6 based on MagicSelector demonstrate that the model achieves an average accuracy of 89.05% on the in-domain test set, signifi-cantly outperforming the 78.04% observed on the out-of-domain set. This performance gap validates the effectiveness of our dataset construction and its capacity to sufficiently elicit model capabilities. Specifically, regarding tool invocation, performance exhibits a gradient decline consistent with increasing complexity. The Single Tool scenario yields the highest performance with an N@10 of 95.48. Although the Cross-category Multi-tool scenario presents greater difficulty, the model maintains an In-Domain N@10 of 86.02 and an OOD N@10 of 74.41, reflecting the dataset’s quality and discriminative power in covering concurrent multi-intent and cross-domain orchestration tasks. In terms of multi-turn dialogue, the User Adds New Task and Domain Switch scenarios achieve high accuracy, with In-Domain N@10 exceeding 95, confirming that the dataset effectively supports training for topic switching and new intent recognition. Furthermore, the State Hybrid scenario serves as a high-difficulty benchmark, recording an In-Domain N@10 of 70.35 and an OOD N@10 of 53.36. Similarly, the Unfinished Task Continua-tion and Abnormal Scenario categories maintain stable OOD performance within the 64–67 range. These outcomes indicate that the dataset successfully encompasses complex logic involving long-term memory, state reasoning, and non-standard execution flows, thereby providing a high-quality and challenging eval-uation baseline. In conclusion, the differentiated performance of MagicSelector across various scenarios fully corroborates the high-quality construction of the MTDTool dataset in both breadth and depth. 22 HONOR 

Table 6: Dataset Quality Evaluation Results 

Scenario Type In-Domain OOD-Domain N@10 C@10 N@10 C@10 Single-turn Single Tool 95.48 100.00 81.95 95.36 Same-category Multi-tool 93.99 95.42 77.77 63.78 Cross-category Multi-tool 86.02 73.27 74.41 55.48 Multi-turn Domain Switch 91.78 95.89 81.27 93.08 Multi-turn Continuation 81.29 83.83 69.31 74.79 Intent Selection 95.09 99.29 82.88 94.13 User Adds New Task 94.31 98.58 84.64 89.51 Unfinished Task Continuation 90.71 87.28 73.00 64.64 Abnormal Scenario 90.20 92.68 77.89 81.65 State Hybrid 88.48 70.35 76.79 53.36 - Avg 89.05 85.24 78.04 75.37 

6.6 Deeper Analysis When might MagicSelector fail? We further analyze that improper reward weight settings can lead to the failure of MagicSelector. As shown in Figure 7 (a)-(c), when the preference reward weight α = 0, the model relies solely on counterfactual signals for optimization. Although it maintains high retrieval accuracy in-domain (N@10 = 90.6), the duplication rate surges to 5.24%, and out-of-domain perfor-mance drops sharply to 78.6. This confirms that pure causal optimization without structural constraints still induces reward hacking, resulting in generalization failure. Conversely, an excessively high α may slightly sacrifice retrieval accuracy due to over-regularization, despite suppressing redundancy. There-fore, the risk of MagicSelector failure primarily stems from extreme imbalances in reward weights; only by maintaining a dynamic balance between causal gain and structural constraints can dual optimality in retrieval accuracy and generalization robustness be achieved. 0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1  

> Parameter Settings
> 80
> 85
> 90
> 95
> NDCG@10  90.6 91.2 90.5
> 86.6
> 89.5
> In-domain

(a) In-Domain 0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1    

> Parameter Settings
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> Duplication Rate (%)  5.24
> 0.71 0.70 0.36 0.41
> In-domain

(b) In-Domain 0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1   

> Parameter Settings
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> NDCG@10  78.6
> 82.7 81.8
> 77.7 78.9
> Out-of-domain

(c) Out-of-Domain 0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1  

> Parameter Settings
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> Duplication Rate (%)  1.60
> 1.35
> 1.00
> 0.10 0.17
> Out-of-domain

(d) Out-of-Domain 

Figure 7: Hyperparameter analysis under different α settings. 

7 CONCLUSION 

In this work, we present MagicSelector, a joint optimization framework specifically designed to address the fundamental challenges of tool retrieval and task planning in Large Language Model (LLM) agents. A counterfactual task decomposition mechanism, a progressive reranking method, and a dynamic Top-K strategy collectively contribute to the framework’s capability to translate ambiguous user instructions into executable atomic subtasks. Specifically, we introduced a preference-guided counterfactual task de-23 HONOR 

composition mechanism that utilizes counterfactual rewards to cut off spurious correlations and impose fine-grained structural supervision on logical coherence. Furthermore, we designed a progressive tool reranking method driven by self-distillation hard negative mining to enhance fine-grained discrimination among highly similar tools. Finally, we implemented a dual semantic boundary-aware dynamic Top-K strategy that adaptively monitors reranking score cliffs and inter-tool semantic shifts to maximize rel-evant tool recall while filtering long-tail noise. Empirical results on MTDTool, our newly constructed benchmark tailored for mobile multi-turn interactions, demonstrate that MagicSelector significantly out-performs state-of-the-art methods in terms of tool retrieval accuracy, out-of-domain (OOD) generaliza-tion capability, and overall token efficiency. We believe this work not only provides a robust solution for high-precision tool retrieval in complex mobile assistant scenarios but also offers a scalable and effective paradigm for developing autonomous agents capable of navigating ambiguous, open-ended real-world environments. 

Author Contributions 

Project Leader 

Zhengzong Chen, Yuanyuan Zhao, Fei Huang 

Core Contributors 

Lei Tang, Lijun Liu, Chuandi Jiang, Fan Yang, Keyun Chu, Chu Zhao, Shihao Liu, Minghang Li 

Contributors 

Bo Liang, Can Wen, Hailong Wu, Jingnan Ju, Mian Liu, Nengbin Zhang, Peiqiang Wang, Penghe Nie, Qinhui Gu, Sijia Lv, Siqi Chen, Wei Zhang, Yang Xu, Yuhao Qian, Yuxiang Zhang, Zeng Cheng, Zhen Wang, Zuan Chen 24 HONOR 

REFERENCES 

Alibaba NLP. gte-qwen2-7b-instruct. https://huggingface.co/Alibaba-NLP/ gte-Qwen2-7B-instruct , 2024. Hugging Face model card. Norbert Braunschweiler, Rama Doddipatla, and Tudor-Catalin Zorila. Toolreagt: tool retrieval for llm-based complex task solution via retrieval augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Towards Knowledgeable Foundation Models (KnowFM) , pp. 75–83, 2025. Tianle Cai, Xuezhi Wang, Tengyu Ma, Xinyun Chen, and Denny Zhou. Large language models as tool makers. In International Conference on Learning Representations , pp. 54067–54089, 2024. Yanfei Chen, Jinsung Yoon, Devendra Singh Sachan, Qingze Wang, Vincent Cohen-Addad, Mohammad-hossein Bateni, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. Re-invoke: Tool invocation rewriting for zero-shot tool retrieval. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pp. 4705– 4726, 2024a. Yanfei Chen, Jinsung Yoon, Devendra Singh Sachan, Qingze Wang, Vincent Cohen-Addad, Mohammad-hossein Bateni, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. Re-invoke: Tool invocation rewriting for zero-shot tool retrieval. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , 2024b. Yu Du, Fangyun Wei, and Hongyang Zhang. AnyTool: Self-reflective, hierarchical agents for large-scale API calls. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 11812– 11829, 2024a. Yu Du, Fangyun Wei, and Hongyang Zhang. AnyTool: Self-reflective, hierarchical agents for large-scale API calls. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 11812– 11829, 2024b. Wei Fang and James Glass. Beyond single-shot: Multi-step tool retrieval via query planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.07782 , 2026. Lang Feng, Zhenghai Xue, Tingcong Liu, and Bo An. Group-in-group policy optimization for llm agent training. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:46375–46408, 2026. Revanth Gangi Reddy, JaeHyeok Doo, Yifei Xu, Md Arafat Sultan, Deevya Swain, Avirup Sil, and Heng Ji. FIRST: Faster improved listwise reranking with single token decoding. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 8642–8652, 2024. Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1 incentivizes reasoning in llms through reinforcement learning. Nature , 645(8081):633–638, 2025. Marti A. Hearst. Text tiling: Segmenting text into multi-paragraph subtopic passages. Computational linguistics , 23(1):33–64, 1997. Shijue Huang, Wanjun Zhong, Jianqiao Lu, Qi Zhu, Jiahui Gao, Weiwen Liu, Yutai Hou, Xingshan Zeng, Yasheng Wang, Lifeng Shang, et al. Planning, creation, usage: Benchmarking llms for comprehensive tool utilization in real-world complex scenarios. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pp. 4363–4400, 2024a. Shouzheng Huang, Meishan Zhang, Baotian Hu, and Min Zhang. Toolomni: Enabling open-world tool use via agentic learning with proactive retrieval and grounded execution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.13787 , 2026. 25 HONOR 

Tenghao Huang, Dongwon Jung, Vaibhav Kumar, Mohammad Kachuee, Xiang Li, Puyang Xu, and Muhao Chen. Planning and editing what you retrieve for enhanced tool learning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024 , pp. 975–988, 2024b. Xu Huang, Weiwen Liu, Xiaolong Chen, Xingmei Wang, Hao Wang, Defu Lian, Yasheng Wang, Ruim-ing Tang, and Enhong Chen. Understanding the planning of llm agents: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02716 , 2024c. Rolf Jagerman, Honglei Zhuang, Zhen Qin, Xuanhui Wang, and Michael Bendersky. Query expansion by prompting large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03653 , 2023. Jean Kaddour, Aengus Lynch, Qi Liu, Matt J Kusner, and Silva Ricardo. Causal machine learning: A survey and open problems. Foundations and Trends in Optimization , 9(1-2):1–247, 2025. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In NeurIPS , 2020. Minghao Li, Yingxiu Zhao, Bowen Yu, Feifan Song, Hangyu Li, Haiyang Yu, Zhoujun Li, Fei Huang, and Yongbin Li. Api-bank: A comprehensive benchmark for tool-augmented llms. In Proceedings of the 2023 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , pp. 3102–3116, 2023a. Zehan Li, Xin Zhang, Yanzhao Zhang, Dingkun Long, Pengjun Xie, and Meishan Zhang. Towards gen-eral text embeddings with multi-stage contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03281 , 2023b. Zhiwei Li, Yong Hu, and Wenqing Wang. Encouraging good processes without the need for good an-swers: Reinforcement learning for llm agent planning. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track , pp. 1654–1666, 2025. Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12, 2024a. Shuo Liu, Zeyu Liang, Xueguang Lyu, and Christopher Amato. Llm collaboration with multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 40, pp. 32150–32158, 2026. Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, et al. Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pp. 52989–53046, 2024b. Xuan Lu, Haohang Huang, Rui Meng, Yaohui Jin, Wenjun Zeng, and Xiaoyu Shen. Tools are under-documented: Simple document expansion boosts tool retrieval, 2025. Xueguang Ma, Xinyu Crystina Zhang, Ronak Pradeep, and Jimmy J. Lin. Zero-shot listwise document reranking with a large language model. ArXiv , abs/2305.02156, 2023. Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. Gaia: a benchmark for general ai assistants. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pp. 9025–9049, 2024. Humza Naveed, Asad Ullah Khan, Shi Qiu, Muhammad Saqib, Saeed Anwar, Muhammad Usman, Naveed Akhtar, Nick Barnes, and Ajmal Mian. A comprehensive overview of large language models. 

ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , 16(5):1–72, 2025. 26 HONOR 

M. E. J Newman. Power laws, pareto distributions and zipf’s law. Contemporary Physics , 46(5):323– 351, 2005. Rodrigo Nogueira and Kyunghyun Cho. Passage re-ranking with bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.04085 ,2019. Rodrigo Nogueira, Wei Yang, Kyunghyun Cho, and Jimmy J. Lin. Multi-stage document ranking with bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.14424 , 2019. Rodrigo Nogueira, Zhiying Jiang, Ronak Pradeep, and Jimmy Lin. Document ranking with a pretrained sequence-to-sequence model. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , 2020. Shishir G Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E Gonzalez. Gorilla: Large language model con-nected with massive apis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:126544–126565, 2024. Ronak Pradeep, Rodrigo Nogueira, and Jimmy J. Lin. The expando-mono-duo design pattern for text ranking with pretrained sequence-to-sequence models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.05667 , 2021. Ronak Pradeep, Sahel Sharifymoghaddam, and Jimmy Lin. Rankvicuna: Zero-shot listwise document reranking with open-source large language models. ArXiv , abs/2309.15088, 2023. Cheng Qian, Chi Han, Yi Fung, Yujia Qin, Zhiyuan Liu, and Heng Ji. CREATOR: Tool creation for disentangling abstract and concrete reasoning of large language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pp. 6922–6939, 2023. Cheng Qian, Emre Can Acikgoz, Qi He, Hongru Wang, Xiusi Chen, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, Gokhan Tur, and Heng Ji. Toolrl: Reward is all tool learning needs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:105523–105553, 2026. Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, Sihan Zhao, Lauren Hong, Runchu Tian, Ruobing Xie, Jie Zhou, Mark Gerstein, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world apis. In International Conference on Learning Representations , pp. 9695–9717, 2024a. Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, et al. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world apis. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pp. 9695–9717, 2024b. Zhen Qin, Rolf Jagerman, Kai Hui, Honglei Zhuang, Junru Wu, Jiaming Shen, Tianqi Liu, Jialu Liu, Donald Metzler, Xuanhui Wang, and Michael Bendersky. Large language models are effective text rankers with pairwise ranking prompting. In NAACL-HLT , 2023. Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using siamese BERT-networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing , pp. 3982–3992, 2019. Stephen Robertson and Hugo Zaragoza. The probabilistic relevance framework: BM25 and beyond. 

Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval , 3(4):333–389, 2009. doi: 10.1561/1500000019. 27 HONOR 

Devendra Singh Sachan, Mike Lewis, Mandar Joshi, Armen Aghajanyan, Wen-tau Yih, Joëlle Pineau, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Improving passage retrieval with zero-shot question generation. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2022. Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach them-selves to use tools. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:68539–68551, 2023. Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Wenqi Zhang, Kan Ren, Siyu Yuan, Weiming Lu, Dongsheng Li, and Yueting Zhuang. Taskbench: Benchmarking large language models for task automation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:4540–4574, 2024. Zhengliang Shi, Yuhan Wang, Lingyong Yan, Pengjie Ren, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, and Zhaochun Ren. Retrieval models aren’t tool-savvy: Benchmarking tool retrieval for large language models. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pp. 24497–24524, 2025. Weiwei Sun, Lingyong Yan, Xinyu Ma, Pengjie Ren, Dawei Yin, and Zhaochun Ren. Is chatgpt good at search? investigating large language models as re-ranking agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09542 ,2023. Chihiro Taguchi, Seiji Maekawa, and Nikita Bhutani. Efficient context selection for long-context QA: No tuning, no iteration, just adaptive-k. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 20105–20130, 2025. Prakhar Verma, Sukruta Prakash Midigeshi, Gaurav Sinha, Arno Solin, Nagarajan Natarajan, and Amit Sharma. Plan-rag: Planning-guided retrieval augmented generation. 2024. Jun Wang, Jiamu Zhou, Xihuai Wang, Xiaoyun Mo, Haoyu Zhang, Qiqiang Lin, Jincheng Jincheng, Muning Wen, Weinan Zhang, and Qiuying Peng. Hammerbench: Fine-grained function-calling evalu-ation in real mobile assistant scenarios. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pp. 3350–3376, 2025a. Liang Wang, Nan Yang, and Furu Wei. Query2doc: Query expansion with large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 9414–9423, 2023. Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaolong Huang, Linjun Yang, Rangan Majumder, and Furu Wei. Improving text embeddings with large language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 2024a. Renxi Wang, Xudong Han, Lei Ji, Shu Wang, Timothy Baldwin, and Haonan Li. Toolgen: Unified tool retrieval and calling via generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025b. Xingyao Wang, Zihan Wang, Jiateng Liu, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. Mint: Eval-uating llms in multi-turn interaction with tools and language feedback. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pp. 32593–32627, 2024b. Peng Xia, Kangyu Zhu, Haoran Li, Tianze Wang, Weijia Shi, Sheng Wang, Linjun Zhang, James Y Zou, and Huaxiu Yao. Mmed-rag: Versatile multimodal rag system for medical vision language models. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations , pp. 66188–66217, 2025. Qiancheng Xu, Yongqi Li, Heming Xia, and Wenjie Li. Enhancing tool retrieval with iterative feedback from large language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , 2024. 28 HONOR 

An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 , 2022. Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. tau -bench: A benchmark for tool-agent-user interaction in real-world domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12045 , 2024. Asaf Yehudai, Lilach Eden, Alan Li, Guy Uziel, Yilun Zhao, Roy Bar-Haim, Arman Cohan, and Michal Shmueli-Scheuer. Survey on evaluation of llm-based agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.16416 , 2025. Soyoung Yoon, Eunbi Choi, Jiyeon Kim, Hyeongu Yun, Yireun Kim, and Seung-won Hwang. ListT5: Listwise reranking with fusion-in-decoder improves zero-shot retrieval. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 2287– 2308, 2024. Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang, Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Junyang Lin, Fei Huang, and Jingren Zhou. Qwen3 embedding: Advancing text embedding and reranking through foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05176 , 2025. Chu Zhao, Lei Tang, Minghang Li, Jianzhe Zhao, Guibing Guo, Zhengzong Chen, Yuanyuan Zhao, and Fei Huang. Pctd: Preference-guided counterfactual task decomposition for agent tool retrieval, 2026a. Penghao Zhao, Hailin Zhang, Qinhan Yu, Zhengren Wang, Yunteng Geng, Fangcheng Fu, Ling Yang, Wentao Zhang, Jie Jiang, and Bin Cui. Retrieval-augmented generation for ai-generated content: A survey. Data Science and Engineering , pp. 1–29, 2026b. Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Zican Dong, Yupeng Hou, Beichen Zhang, Yingqian Min, Junjie Zhang, Peiyu Liu, et al. A survey of large language models. Frontiers of Computer Science , 20(12):2012627, 2026c. Zhewei Zhi, Yingyi Zhang, Yi Jing, Xianneng Li, Jianing Liu, Huajie Liu, and Yongliang Ding. Compress-then-rank: Faster and better listwise reranking with large language models via ranking-aware passage compression. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2026. Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, et al. Webarena: A realistic web environment for building autonomous agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pp. 15585–15606, 2024. 29 HONOR 

APPENDIX Contents 

Appendix 30 A Tool Schemas and Prompt Templates 31 B Case Studies 34 

30 HONOR 

A TOOL SCHEMAS AND PROMPT TEMPLATES 

System: You are a real human phone user interacting with an AI voice assistant. Generate a natural spoken command. 

User: 

Below is the list of tools available to the assistant (for your reference only; you must trigger them implicitly): 

available_tools: [{"tool_name": "create_reminder", "description": "Create, query, delete and modify reminders", "actions": ["create", "query", "delete"], "objects": ["time", "title", "repeat rule"]}, {"tool_name": "weather_service", "description": "Query weather for a specified city and date", "actions": ["query weather"], "objects": ["city", "date"]}, {"tool_name": "calendar_service", "description": "Query, create, modify and delete calendar events", "actions": ["query", "create", "delete"], "objects": ["title", "start time", "end time", "location"]} ]

Conceive a natural human voice command, strictly following these rules: (1) Order : express demands in the exact order of the tool list. (2) One-tool-one-request : exactly 3 tools ⇒ exactly 3 demands. (3) Colloquial conversion : do not copy official terminology verbatim. (4) No long sentences : do not cram all demands into one sentence. 

State guidance (injected when a tool is assigned the Ask-Detail state): Tool weather_service is in state Ask-Detail . You must deliberately omit exactly one critical information slot (e.g., city) in the corresponding de-mand. The omission must be achieved through natural colloquial phrasing, with no explanatory language. 

Linguistic style (one feature randomly sampled per turn): Use fuzzy quantifiers and relative time —avoid exact numbers or absolute timestamps; use expressions like "a bit", "later", "in a couple of days" in exactly one demand. 

Expected output: Set a reminder for me to pick up the kid this afternoon. Oh, by the way, what’s the weather like tomorrow? And while you’re at it, check if I’ve got any meetings on Wednesday. First-turn user prompt for instruction generation. Variable blocks (tool list, state guidance, linguistic style) are dynamically injected based on the state-machine configuration. 31 HONOR 

System: You are an AI voice assistant. Generate a natural, helpful response based on the user’s command and backend execution states. 

User: “Set a reminder for me to pick up the kid this afternoon. Oh, by the way, what’s the weather like tomorrow? And while you’re at it, check if I’ve got any meetings on Wednesday.” 

Assistant: 

Backend execution states: 

- Tool : Create , query , delete and modify reminders State : [ Success ] - Tool : Query weather for a specified city and date State : [ Ask - Detail ] Follow - up direction : city - Tool : Query , create , modify and delete calendar events State : [ Silent ] 

(2) Coherent delivery : blend multiple task feedback into one fluent response; no bullet-point reporting. (3) No tool leakage : never reveal tool names, codes, or backend terminology. 

Expected output: “Your reminder to pick up the kid this afternoon has been set. By the way, which city would you like me to check the weather for tomorrow?” 

First-turn assistant prompt. Responses are strictly driven by execution states; the Silent tool is completely absent from the output. 

System: You are a real human phone user. Generate the next-turn spoken command, building on the prior conversation. 

Dialogue history: 

User: Set a reminder to pick up the kid this afternoon. Oh, by the way, what’s the weather like tomorrow? And check if I’ve got any meetings on Wednesday.” 

Assistant: Your afternoon reminder is set. Which city would you like me to check the weather for?” 

User (next turn): 

This turn requires: 

• Answer the assistant’s follow-up question about the missing city. • Introduce new demands corresponding to the tools below. 

Tools and target states: 

[" weather_service " , " calendar_service " , " wifi_service "] States : [ Ask - Detail , Select , Silent ] 

Rules: 

1. Supplement : provide the previously omitted city name naturally; do not repeat the full original instruction. 2. Selection : choose one of the assistant’s offered options; output only the option itself. 3. Silent : completely skip this tool—no mention, hint, or summary. 4. Order : demands must follow the tool list order. 5. One-tool-one-request : exactly 3 tools ⇒ 3 demands. 6. No confirmation words : no "okay", "thanks", etc. 

Linguistic style (one demand only): Use inverted sentence —front-load the object before the action, e.g., “That QQ Music, open it for me.” 

Expected output: “Beijing. The first meeting on Wednesday, cancel that. And turn on the Wi-Fi.” 

Next-turn user prompt (context-inheritance mode). The user must simultaneously answer the assistant’s prior follow-up, make a selection, introduce new demands, and silently skip one tool—all in a single utterance. 32 HONOR 

System: You are an AI voice assistant. Generate a natural response based on the user’s next-turn command and backend execution states. 

User: “Beijing. The first meeting on Wednesday, cancel that. And turn on the Wi-Fi.” 

Assistant: 

Backend execution states: 

Tool : Query weather for a specified city and date State : [Success ] Tool : Query , create , modify and delete calendar events State : [ Ask - Detail ] Follow - up direction : specific date to cancel Tool : Toggle Wi - Fi connectivity State : [ Executing ] 

Response rules: 

1. State-driven :• Success : confirm completion. • Ask-Detail : ask a specific question for the missing information. • Executing : inform the user the task is being processed. • Silent : completely skip, as if the demand never existed. 2. Coherent : blend all feedback into one fluent response. 3. No tool leakage : never reveal tool names or backend terms. 

Expected output: “I’ve checked the weather for Beijing—it looks clear tomorrow. Which specific meeting on Wednesday would you like me to cancel? Meanwhile, I’m turning on the Wi-Fi for you.” 

Next-turn assistant prompt. Identical rule structure to the first-turn version; only the injected user query and tool states differ. 

System: You are a multi-turn rewriting and task decomposition expert. Decompose user commands into single-turn, single-task units. 

Dialogue history: 

User: Set a reminder to pick up the kid this afternoon. Oh, by the way, what’s the weather like tomorrow? And check if I’ve got any meetings on Wednesday.” 

Assistant: Your afternoon reminder is set. Which city would you like me to check the weather for?” 

Current query: “Beijing. The first meeting on Wednesday, cancel that. And turn on the Wi-Fi.” 

Task definition: 

1. Rewriting : resolve pronouns and omissions using context. E.g., (Q: open Bluetooth)(A: done)(Q: turn it off)” → turn off Bluetooth”. 2. Multi-task splitting : separate compound commands into atomic tasks. E.g., (Q: open Wi-Fi, Bluetooth and dark mode)” → open Wi-Fi < br >open Bluetooth < br >enable dark mode”. 

Output format: separate tasks with <br> .

Expected output: 

“Query weather for Beijing < br >cancel the first Wednesday meeting < br >turn on Wi-Fi” 

Task decomposition prompt. Invoked independently at each turn to produce an atomic task sequence 

At , forming the middle tier of the three-level annotation structure (context → atomic tasks → candidate tools). 33 HONOR 

B CASE STUDIES Part 1: Multi-turn Dialogue 

Round 1 (Initial) — Selected Tools: check_weather , wifi_service 

States: [Ask-Detail, Executing] 

User: “What’s the weather like tomorrow? And turn on the Wi-Fi.” 

Task split: 

“Query tomorrow’s weather” “Turn on Wi-Fi” 

Retrieval & Reranking: 

Task 1 Candidates: [check_weather , search_location , hotel_service , browser_service ,

location_service ]Task 2 Candidates: [wifi_service , network_settings , device_control , system_settings ,

bluetooth_service ]

Tool Orchestration: 

check_weather (time=“tomorrow") ∥ wifi_service (action=“turn_on") 

Assistant: “Which city would you like me to check the weather for tomorrow? Meanwhile, I’m enabling Wi-Fi for you.” 

Round 2 (Inherit) — Selected Tools: check_weather , create_reminder 

States: [Success, Success] 

User: “Beijing. Also remind me to bring my laptop tomorrow.” 

Task split: 

“Query weather for Beijing” “Remind to bring laptop tomorrow” 

Retrieval & Reranking: 

Task 1 Candidates: (Inherited from Round 1) Task 2 Candidates: [create_reminder , open_reminder , search_service , note_service ,

system_settings ]

Tool Orchestration: 

check_weather (location=“Beijing", time=“tomorrow") ∥ create_reminder (content=“bring laptop", time=“tomorrow") 

Assistant: “Got it—tomorrow in Beijing will be partly cloudy, around 18 degrees. I have also set a reminder for you to bring your laptop tomorrow.” 

Round 3 (Switch) — Selected Tools: music_service , bluetooth_service 

States: [Success, Success] 

User: “Play some light music. Oh, and connect the headphones.” 

Task split: 

“Play light music” “Connect Bluetooth headphones” 

Retrieval & Reranking: 

Task 1 Candidates: [music_service , search_media , query_media , audio_control ,

video_service ]Task 2 Candidates: [bluetooth_service , device_control , wifi_service , network_settings ,

system_settings ]

Tool Orchestration: 

music_service (genre=“light music", action=“play") ∥ bluetooth_service (device=“headphones", ac-tion=“connect") 

Assistant: “Playing a light music playlist. Your Bluetooth headphones are now connected.” 

Case 1: Multi-turn Dialogue. Round 1 initializes states; Round 2 inherits context to answer follow-ups while introducing a new task; Round 3 switches to an entirely new topic. 34 HONOR 

Part 2: Single-turn Multi-task 

Selected Tools: create_reminder , check_weather 

States: [Success, Success] 

User: “Set a reminder to pick up the kid this afternoon. Oh, by the way, what’s the weather like in Beijing tomorrow?” 

Task split: 

“Set reminder to pick up kid this afternoon” “Query tomorrow’s weather in Beijing” 

Retrieval & Reranking: 

Task 1 Candidates: [create_reminder , search_service , open_reminder , search_media ,

query_media ]Task 2 Candidates: [check_weather , search_location , hotel_service , browser_service ,

location_service ]

Tool Orchestration: 

create_reminder (content=“pick up kid", time=“this afternoon") ∥ check_weather (location=“Beijing", time=“tomorrow") 

Assistant: “Your afternoon reminder is set. Tomorrow in Beijing will be partly cloudy, around 18 degrees.” 

Case 2: Single-turn Multi-task. The user issues multiple independent intents in a single utterance. The system decomposes the query, performs retrieval and reranking for each sub-task, orchestrates the selected tools, and generates a combined response. 35